TITLE: Casebook: a virtual patient iPad application for teaching decision-making through the use of electronic health records
AUTHORS: Marcus D Bloice, Klaus-Martin Simonic, Andreas Holzinger
YEAR: 2014
DOI: 10.1186/1472-6947-14-66

CONTENT:
S O F T W A R E Open Access
Casebook: a virtual patient iPad application for
teaching decision-making through the use of
electronic health records
Marcus D Bloice 1*, Klaus-Martin Simonic 1 and Andreas Holzinger 1,2
Abstract
Background: Virtual Patients are a well-known and widely used form of interactive software used to simulate
aspects of patient care that students are increasingly less likely to encounter during their studies. However, to take
full advantage of the benefits of using Virtual Patients, students should have access to multitudes of cases. In order
to promote the creation of collections of cases, a tablet application was developed which makes use of electronic
health records as material for Virtual Patient cases. Because electronic health records are abundantly available on
hospital information systems, this results in much material for the basis of case creation.
Results: An iPad-based Virtual Patient interactive software system was developed entitled Casebook. The application
has been designed to read specially formatted patient cases that have been created using electronic health records,
in the form of X-ray images, electrocardiograms, lab reports, and physician notes, and present these to the medical
student. These health records are organised into a timeline, and the student navigates the case while answering
questions regarding the patient along the way. Each health record can also be annotated with meta-information by
the case designer, such as insight into the thought processes and the decision-making rationale of the physician
who originally worked with the patient. Students learn decision-making skills by observing and interacting with real
patient cases in this simulated environment. This paper discusses our approach in detail.
Conclusions: Our group is of the opinion that Virtual Patient cases, targeted at undergraduate students, should
concern patients who exhibit prototypical symptoms of the kind students may encounter when beginning their
first medical jobs. Learning theory research has shown that students learn decision-making skills best when they
have access to multitudes of patient cases and it is this plurality that allows students to develop their illness scripts
effectively. Casebook emphasises the use of pre-existing electronic health record data as the basis for case creation,
t h u s ,i ti sh o p e d ,m a k i n gi te a s i e rt op r o d u c ec a s e si nl a r g e rn u m b e r s .B yc r e a t i n gaV i r t u a lP a t i e n ts y s t e m
where cases are built from abundantly available electronic health records, collections of cases can be accumulated
by institutions.
Keywords: Electronic health records, Decision-making, Diagnostic reasoning
Background
Casebook is a tablet-based, interactive Virtual Patient
teaching application for undergraduate students of medi-
cine. Within the Casebook system, the Virtual Patients are
patient cases that consist of temporally organised, anno-
tated electronic health records, such as patient presenta-
tion reports, X-ray images, lab reports, electrocardiograms,
and so on. Annotations can be defined as physician notes
that have been added to electronic health records for the
purpose of providing some insight for the student into the
physician’s decision-making rationale. These temporally
organised cases are stored in specially formatted archives
that can be read by the Casebook application on the iPad
and displayed to the student.
The foremost aim of the Casebook Virtual Patient ap-
plication is to help to teach clinical diagnostic reasoning
and decision-making skills to undergraduate students of
medicine through the examination of real patient cases
* Correspondence: marcus.bloice@medunigraz.at
1Institute for Medical Informatics, Statistics, and Documentation, Medical
University of Graz, Auenbruggerplatz 2, Graz 8036, Austria
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2014 Bloice et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.
Bloice et al. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 2014, 14:66
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6947/14/66
and scenarios. The student navigates a case by traversing
through a timeline of patient records, and, at strategic
points throughout the case, questions must be answered
by the student before they can continue. Questions can
consist of the student having to make an appropriate
clinical decision (the answer being revealed by the next
patient record in the timeline), deciding on a working
diagnosis or differential diagnosis, or for the student to
answer questions regarding an inference that can be
made from a lab report or X-ray image. Cases for the
Casebook application are created using a text editor, by
writing a descriptor file containing the case ’s meta-data
(questions, answers, patient record annotations) and
packaging this with the patient records into a ZIP file
that is read by the application. Because the cases consist
of data and patient records from real-life medical situa-
tions that genuinely occurred, the cases should more
closely mimic real-life scenarios than Virtual Patients
that rely on produced or simulated data. We believe that
Virtual Patients, even those based on real patient cases,
can potentially contain misleading simulated data, espe-
cially in lab reports. Of course, real patient data can also
contain badly recorded data and manually written anno-
tations have similar potential to contain erroneous infor-
mation; hence the proper vetting of cases is as always a
requirement.
Motivation for the design of Casebook
The motivation for the design and development of
Casebook stems from the following observations:
/C15Multimedia costs can contribute to the production
times of certain Virtual Patient systems, which we
wished to mitigate [ 1-3]
/C15Research into how clinical reasoning and decision
making is learnt suggests that access to multitudes
of patient examples is key to learning decision-making
skills [4-6]
/C15Students feel they are not prepared for clinical work:
evidence shows that they feel unprepared for
standard, typical patient presentations and common
conditions [ 7-9]
Our group is of the opinion that electronic health
records make for useful teaching material when formatted
and packaged into coherent, logically constructed cases.
Each of the three points above is discussed in more detail
in the following sections.
Reducing multimedia reliance
While most agree that the use of Virtual Patients in con-
junction with traditional teaching methods is associated
with large positive effects [10], depending on the type of
system being developed, multimedia production can
incur relatively high costs if multimedia is used exten-
sively for Virtual Patient creation [1]. Casebook has been
designed to mitigate the use of multimedia, by removing
the need for producing it and relying entirely on already
available electronic patient records.
Therefore, the Casebook application was designed to
make use of electronic health records that are abundantly
available in hospital information systems. This alleviates
the need to produce rich multimedia, such as video or ani-
mation, which can contribute to the overall cost of produ-
cing individual cases on certain systems. Our group have
previously reported that few Virtual Patient systems have
been developed that make use of electronic health records
in this way [11].
The power of the plural
Judith Bowen ’s article of 2006 on educational strategies
to promote clinical reasoning is wide ranging, and covers
several approaches to teaching this aspect of medicine to
undergraduate students [4]. An overarching principle of
her work is that experience with patients is essential in
students being able to make connections between material
learned and the development or ability to reason analytic-
ally. This experience builds pattern recognition, meaning
the more experience a student has, the more likely they
will make a correct diagnosis from the data available to
them. The student must have experience with similar
patients or scenarios in order to build illness scripts: the
combination of conditions, symptoms, and diseases that
can trigger the recall of information. This is the “power
of the plural ” w h e r em u l t i p l ee x a m p l e sf a c i l i t a t et r a n s f e r
[5]. Other work has shown that students are found to
learn best when they can calibrate themselves across
multiple cases [6].
However, this experience is becoming ever harder for
students to gain. Ideally students should make frequent
visits to wards during their education, but due to
advances in medical practice this is not the case. Because
of these advances in medical science, patients are being
dealt with in outpatients ’ wards rather than being hospi-
talised, meaning students have less access to patients
exhibiting common conditions, and it is these types of
encounters we wish to simulate using the Casebook ap-
plication [12]. The plurality required is not present in
their education, and is considered to be a“major challenge”.
This has resulted in students having less access to pa-
tients exhibiting common conditions, which is effecting
student perceptions of prepa redness, as discussed in the
next section.
However, this lack of access to patients is considered
to be “fertile ground ” for computer simulations, where
numerous cases, each of them a variation of a theme,
could be displayed to students to compensate for this lack
of real life experience [6,13-16].
Bloice et al. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 2014, 14:66 Page 2 of 9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6947/14/66
Therefore, there is much literature that suggests the
availability of multiple cases, either real patients or sim-
ulations, is advantageous for learning decision-making.
The Casebook application aids the case creator by allow-
ing for EHRs to be used as the basis for Virtual Patient
cases. Its aim, therefore, is to encourage the creation of
pools of cases, by allowing for case creators to make full
use of the abundance of patient cases available on
hospital information systems.
Student preparedness
Work has shown that students feel unprepared for their
first medical jobs upon graduation from medical school.
In 2003, Goldacre et al. [7] reported on a survey
conducted by them to ascertain how prepared students
felt after graduation. They found that 41% of students
felt unprepared for their first year of employment. Ac-
cording to a follow-up survey conducted six years later
by Cave et al. in 2007, the situation has improved some-
what since the Goldacre survey, yet still only 59% of
students agreed that they were well prepared [8]. Rea-
sons given for this perception of unpreparedness were,
for example, a lack of preparation for basic problems
found on wards and a lack of emphasis on real life situa-
tions. Ochsmann et al. found similarly disconcerting
results in Germany, where 60% of graduates reporting
they felt unprepared [9].
In order to increase student perceptions of prepared-
ness, multitudes of patient cases need to be accumulated
– and these cases should also cover patients who are
suffering from common conditions of the types that
students will encounter when they first begin work as
junior doctors. Casebook aids this process by allowing
patient records to be used as the basis for Virtual Patient
creation, thereby aiding the collection of pools of cases
for students to access. Hospital information systems
contain much patient data, and we believe this data has
potential to be used in creating cases that deal with
patients exhibiting common symptoms.
Health record properties
Electronic health records contain a number of properties
that make them desirable as teaching material. In 2000
[17] and 2005 [18], Ziv et al. described how students can
reduce diagnostic error when they have been provided
the opportunity to learn from their mistakes, thus making
simulations ideal tools for such learning experiences. Cru-
cially, however, they reported that students also reduce
error when learning from others ’ mistakes. Electronic
health records provide an ideal resource for learning from
error: health records, properly organised into patient
cases, with the relevant annotations and discussions, pro-
vide for a unique opportunity to examine mistakes and
their consequences. This would allow students to examine
the cause of an error, or perhaps more importantly, the
course of events that occurred which eventually led to an
error. Therefore, cases do not necessarily have to present
“textbook” solutions, treatments, or behaviours to encoun-
tered problems. Diagnostic error, discovered after the end
of the patient ’s treatment, would make for suitable cases
to teach the consequences of diagnostic error [19,20].
Similarly, documentation and history-taking are im-
portant aspects of clinical skills education that would
benefit from students examining both good and bad
examples of medical documentation [21]. Also, colloqui-
alisms and abbreviations are rife in medicine, and many
of them are field-specific, while others still are region
specific [22]. Students who study electronic health
records may find that they become accustomed to such
abbreviations more quickly if they encounter them in
patient cases before they finish their education and begin
working as doctors.
Last, electronic health records and cases based on real
patients offer a unique ability to follow the patient over
the course of an illness. Hirsh et al. comment that in an
ideal scenario, a student should be able to observe the
patient at or around the time when the initial medical
decision-making is being made, and be able to follow the
patient through the duration of an illness episode, even
across care venues. Students should be able to witness
the effects of management decisions [23]. By teaching
students using cases built from patient records, they are
provided the opportunity to follow the patient ’s course
of disease or illness, and thereby witness the effects of
management decisions in real life clinical situations.
Implementation
Taking the background research into account, our group
set about designing an application that would use elec-
tronic health records, gathered from hospital informa-
tion systems, to create Virtual Patient cases for use in
teaching diagnostic reasoning to undergraduate students
of medicine. The Casebook software itself has been
developed for the Apple iPad family of devices. The tab-
let form factor was chosen as the software ’s intended use
is by small groups of four to five students within semi-
nars, the omni-directional and easy to handle properties
of the tablet being especially useful for such purposes.
While our group decided to use the Apple ecosystem for
the development of the Casebook application, Android
tablets, such as the Google Nexus 7, feature no technical
limitations that would have excluded them as a possible
development platform. Software for Apple devices is
written in Objective-C using the Xcode Integrated Deve-
lopment Environment (IDE), a freely available program-
ming tool for Apple Macintosh computers. Our group
previously reported on the development of an early version
of the application both as a native, compiled application,
Bloice et al. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 2014, 14:66 Page 3 of 9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6947/14/66
written in Objective-C, and as an HTML5-based applica-
tion that would run in a browser on Android and Apple
tablets [24,25].
Requirements
The software requirements were garnered from the the-
oretical background discussed in the previous sections,
and consisted of three main elements. First, the software
was designed to display and present Virtual Patient cases
that were generated from electronic health records,
organised temporally. For this purpose, a case file format
was developed, which is discussed in a subsection below.
In order to make it as easy as possible to generate cases,
the case file format was also designed to be as simple
and straightforward as possible. Second, the software
must make it possible for annotations to be displayed
when patient records are being viewed. Third, the soft-
ware must examine the student as they navigate through
the case, so that their progress can be measured and
compared.
The Results section describes in detail the functionality
of the software, provides screenshots, and explains how
the software can be obtained.
Case file format
The Virtual Patient cases for the Casebook application
are built from electronic health records that are logically
organised into a timeline, allowing the student to navi-
gate the case and view the patient's progress as the case
develops. As the case is navigated, the student must an-
swer questions about the progression of the case ( “What
would you do next ” questions)—the next patient record
revealing the answer. Currently, only multiple choice
questions are supported, however recent work has shown
that interactive systems can even successfully employ nat-
ural language processing [26].
In order to create a system into which patient cases
can easily be imported, a custom file format has been
developed. We expect that this format will be modified
further as requirements for the Virtual Patient cases de-
velop and expand. Cases themselves are stored as stand-
ard ZIP archives. A case archive consists of two main
parts: 1) a JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) descriptor
file which describes the structure of the case (the order
of the files and the case ’s departments/sections) as well
as containing all patient record annotations and mul-
tiple choice question data, and 2) the patient records
themselves.
The JSON file is named case.json and contains the
meta-information about the case itself. Each case has a
title, a description, annotation data, questions/answers,
and data regarding the structure and order of the case.
The JSON descriptor file describes the order of the pa-
tient records, each of which must also be included in the
ZIP archive. Patient records themselves must be in the
Portable Network Graphics (PNG) format.
An example case file (Additional file 1) in the Casebook
file format is provided; this file contains 15 patient records
and one descriptor file. A web-based version, for viewing
in any browser, is also provided in Additional file 2 as a
mini-website.
There is no restriction regarding the type of electronic
medical record that can be included within a case, as
long as the file can be converted into the PNG format
and is therefore also not restricted to any type of elec-
tronic medical record system. This would include any
document-based electronic health record, and any medical
image files. A table describing the time efforts required to
create the example case are described in T able 1.
As Table 1 shows, the creation of this particular case
was performed in just over one working day, using pre-
existing material extracted from a case report on the
Journal of Medical Case Reports repository [27]. These
times do not take into account any operational chal-
lenges that might be expected when creating cases, such
as case suitability vetting, de-identification, or case sim-
plification: such aspects were borne by the authors of
the case report itself. The operational challenges of de-
veloping cases from patient data are of course real, how-
ever, we believe them to be no more challenging than
the efforts required to develop cases for classroom case-
based learning scenarios.
While there is no stipulation as to who should create
the cases, the application is primarily intended to be
used by physicians who are involved in teaching. The
physician teaching the case must not necessarily be the
teacher who wrote the case. However, any annotations
added to the case that contain information regarding the
patient that might not be clear from simply viewing the
Table 1 Case creation time
Step Duration Software
1: Medical data gathered from JMCR case report repository 1 hour Internet browser
2: Medical data converted to patient record template 2 hours PDF viewer, word processor
3: Case annotated by physician 4 hours N/A
4: Case meta data written in JSON format (case.json) 1 hour Text editor, online JSON syntax validator
Details of the time expenditure for the conversion of the JMCR case for use in the Casebook application.
Bloice et al. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 2014, 14:66 Page 4 of 9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6947/14/66
patient records, would need to be included by the physician
w h od e a l tw i t ht h ep a t i e n ti nq u e s t i o n .
Security of sensitive information
It is important to emphasise that while Casebook is an
open source project, and is freely available online, pa-
tient data and cases themselves are not in any way made
available or shared online by the application. Cases devel-
oped for the application are for internal teaching purposes
only; the application itself is only used as a platform for
displaying these cases and assessing students. Of course,
teachers and institutions can share cases developed for the
platform.
In terms of application security, it was also necessary
to choose a platform where extremely sensitive data,
such as patient data, could be stored in an encrypted
form to ensure against unauthorised access. The Apple
iOS range of devices support the hardware-level encryption
of data using a 256-bit AES algorithm. Using enterprise
management, iPads can be configured to have any number
of features disabled or enforced, such as enforced use of
long passwords. Other security features include auto lock
(the device locks itself after a configurable amount of idle
time), remote wipe (the ability to remotely delete a device ’s
contents), or auto wipe (the ability to stipulate that the de-
vice deletes all of its contents after a particular number of
failed password attempts). When a device is erased, either
remotely or because of too many failed password attempts,
a technique known as crypto-shredding is used. This can
delete the contents of a device in seconds by removing the
decryption keys, rendering all data inaccessible. As well as
this, iPads can be restricted to disable features such as the
camera, or the ability to take screenshots [28]. By using
such enterprise provisioning profiles, sensitive data stored
on iPads can be considered secure.
In terms of de-identified patient data, the Casebook
application does not enforce or restrict in any way the
content that is displayed or stored on the iPad device.
The development of properly de-identified and anon-
ymised patient cases is the responsibility of those develop-
ing the cases for the software and their respective ethics
committees. Of course, this means that there are oper-
ational overheads that must be considered when devel-
oping cases based on real patient health records, such as
ethics commission approval and case vetting.
Results and discussion
This section describes the functionality of the software
and how it is used. A video walkthrough of Casebook in
use is available in Additional file 3.
Software functionality
Upon starting the application, the user is presented with
an interface consisting of four tabs. The first tab contains
a help screen which allows the user to get acquainted with
how the application works. Users can swipe through a
number of screens that describe the functionality of the
application, including a description of the functionality of
each of the toolbar icons (Additional file 3 contains a
video of the application in use).
The cases tab lists all the cases that have been imported
onto the device. Once a case has been selected from the
list available, the case ’s sections are presented to the user.
Sections are stipulated by the case creator, and should be
used to split the case into logical segments to aid naviga-
tion. Once a student completes a section, the second sec-
tion becomes available for selection and so on. Once a
user has selected the first section, the first health record is
displayed (Figure 1).
As shown in Figure 1, the patient record itself domi-
nates the centre of the screen. The top bar is the naviga-
tion bar, allowing the user to move left and right along
the timeline of patient records and multiple-choice ques-
tions. The toolbar on the bottom of the screen allows
the user to navigate back to the list of departments/sec-
tions (using the blue overview button) and also allows
the user to view any patient record annotations that
might be available. The curled up page icon on the bot-
tom right of the screen is enabled if any annotations are
available. Tapping it curls back the current patient rec-
ord and presents the user with that record ’s annotations
(Figure 2).
As the user navigates through a patient case, they will
occasionally encounter multiple-choice questions which
they must answer before continuing. When a question is
being presented to the user, the toolbar is slightly al-
tered, displaying two further icons that allow the user to
clear any selected answers and start over, and to submit
their answers. Questions may also contain supplemental
information in the form of hints, much like patient rec-
ord annotations. These hints can be accessed using the
icon on the toolbar, which is enabled if any hints are
available. Once the user has submitted their answer, they
are provided with immediate feedback and are allowed
to continue to the next patient record along the time-
line. Cases progress in this pattern until all sections are
complete, at which point the students are given the op-
portunity to rate the case in terms of difficultly.
Additional file 3 contains a four minute long video
walkthrough of the application in use, highlighting most
aspects of the application in use.
Learning outcomes
Currently, the Casebook application relies on multiple-
choice questions to assess the student. For a purely
automated assessment, multiple-choice questions are par-
ticularly suitable, yet natural language processing has also
been shown to be feasible [29]. However, we emphasise
Bloice et al. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 2014, 14:66 Page 5 of 9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6947/14/66
a n dr e c o m m e n dt h a tc a s e ss h o u l db eu s e dt ot e s tt h e
diagnostic reasoning of the student, not to test their
knowledge of a particular subject. When a student an-
swers a question, they are presented with the patient
record that shows what decision the physician made in
the real world, along with notes as to the diagnostic rea-
soning and thought processes that occurred when mak-
ing this decision (in the form of annotations). It is not
the intention of Casebook to assess the knowledge of
the student, rather, the questions should be used to as-
sess whether the student has a grasp of what may be the
correct path to take or diagnosis to make at a particular
point of the patient ’s treatment. Of course, multiple-
choice questions can also be used to quiz students on
their knowledge, but that is not the primary aim of the
Casebook project. And, as we do not want to introduce
bias, we recommend that cases that are known to have
involved diagnostic error should also be viewed by stu-
dents [30].
Future development
The application will continue to be further developed
and will eventually include more features than those de-
scribed here. The source code for the Casebook applica-
tion is available under the project ’sG i t H u bw e b s i t e ,a s
seen in the Availability and requirements section at the
end of this paper. Two repositories are available there:
the first repository (casebookdev/Casebook-Preconfi-
gured) is a ‘frozen’ project that contains a preconfigured
build of the application including a built-in sample, ficti-
tious, patient case. Any further development will continue
in a forked, separate repository (casebookdev/Casebook).
Figure 1 Viewing an electronic health record. The application’s main view is shown here, which presents to the user a health record to
examine. The patient record can be scrolled and zoomed using standard pinch and zoom multi-touch gestures. By tapping ‘Overview’ the user is
returned to the list of departments or sections. The user can also navigate left and right along the timeline using the navigation bar on the top
of the screen. By tapping the annotations button on the bottom right, the user is presented with any notes that the teacher has provided for
them, as shown in Figure 2.
Bloice et al. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 2014, 14:66 Page 6 of 9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6947/14/66
This ensures that readers can access the same application that
is demonstrated in the video contained in Additional file 3.
Further information on how to build and run the appli-
cation can be found in the project ’s GitHub wiki.
Future work will concentrate on several aspects, includ-
ing minor feature enhancements as well as larger en-
hancements and subprojects such as the case creator.
More involved enhancements will include, for example, an
investigation into cases that operate in real time —that is,
cases where a realistic amount of time passes between
procedures. Previous work has shown the detrimental ef-
fects of time constraints on assessment, and is an area we
wish to pursue [31]. In such a scenario, students would
use the iPad over the course of a few days. New develop-
ments in the case appear slowly, and push notifications
ensure the student is made aware of any changes in the
patient's status.
Finally, cases must currently be created manually by
collecting the health records required and describing
their order, annotations, and question data in the case.
json descriptor file. However, the procedure is rather in-
elegant with regard to the manual creation of the case.
json descriptor file. To aid case creation, a ‘case creator ’
application will be developed as a subproject. The case
creator will facilitate case development through the use
of a Graphical User Interface, by allowing for cases to be
structured using a drag and drop interface. Annotation
and question data would also be added using the
GUI. The proposed case creator software will be writ-
t e ni nJ a v aa n dm a d ea v a i l a b l eo nt h ep r o j e c t ’s
GitHub repository. Using the Java programming lan-
guage ensures cross-platfo rm compatibility [32]. Cur-
rently, only a small number of test cases have been
developed for demonstrating the application —ac a s e
Figure 2 Viewing a patient record annotation. When viewing a patient record, students can view annotations that have been provided by the
teacher or physician who created the case. Such annotations can provide insight into the decision-making processes that led the physician to
perform a particular clinical action, for example.
Bloice et al. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 2014, 14:66 Page 7 of 9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6947/14/66
creator application will hopefully encourage more cases to
be developed.
Conclusions
Research has shown that students feel they are not pre-
pared for their first jobs after graduating from medical
school. This perception of decreased preparedness can
be attributed to a lack of ward work and exposure to
basic clinical practice. The ability to generate working
diagnoses, however, relies on experience on the ward,
experience with patients, and repeated exposure to real
clinical scenarios. Advances in clinical science mean that
more and more patients are being treated in outpatient
wards rather than being hospitalised, meaning students
are even less likely to encounter patients exhibiting proto-
typical presentations. Virtual Patient systems have been
proposed as a suitable substitute for this lack of exposure.
By making it possible to quickly use cases stored in hos-
pital information systems, we believe that the Casebook
application can encourage more cases to be developed
relating to prototypical situations.
Because pattern recognition is of paramount import-
ance for the ability to generate working diagnoses and
hypotheses, collections of cases are required. Therefore,
pools of similar cases are required so that students can
properly develop their illness scripts in order to make
suitable and valid diagnoses when confronted with a
new patient. The aim of the Casebook application is to
emphasise the reuse of electronic health records for
teaching purposes, and therefore allow for such pools to
be generated.
Hence the decision to create a Virtual Patient system
that makes use of the abundance of electronic health
records found in hospital information systems. Our group
believes there are several inherent advantages to using
such an approach, including cost benefits, cases that more
closely match real-life situations, the ability to create
collections of similar cases, and the advantage of being
able to create Virtual Patients for typical and common
problems, these being the types of patients students are
least likely to see during their education.
By making is possible to create cases using electronic
health records, and allowing for these patient records to
be annotated with physician ’s notes and insights, we
hope that students can gain an understanding into the
thought processes and clinical reasoning of the physician
who worked on the patient.
The developed application, which we have described
here in detail, is one possible approach to using electronic
health records for teaching decision-making and clinical
reasoning. There are likely many other approaches, and
indeed many other enhancements that could be made to
the software to improve how it functions. It is hoped, that
by making the software open-source and freely available
to download, modify, and distribute under the terms of
the GPL licence, other institutions may also wish to
become involved in the project. The source has therefore
been made available on GitHub and will continue to be
hosted there as development continues.
Availability and requirements
The following outlines the requirements and availability
of the Casebook project:
/C15Project name: Casebook
/C15Project homepage: https://github.com/casebookdev
/C15Operating System(s): iOS
/C15Programming language: Objective-C
/C15Other requirements: iPad running iOS 6, Macintosh
computer and Xcode for building project source.
/C15Licence: GNU GPL v2
Additional files
Additional file 1: Example case file. This file contains an example case
in ZIP format that consists of 15 health records and a single JSON
descriptor file (case.json) in the Casebook file format. The descriptor file
describes the order of the health records, contains any annotations for
each of the health records, and contains any questions that appear
between health records. Portions of this case, including text, were
extracted from a case published in the Journal of Medical Case Reports,
an open-access journal where articles are made available under the terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution Licence [27].
Additional file 2: Mini-website. HTML version of the example case that
can be viewed using a browser. See Additional file 1 for this case in the
Casebook file format.
Additional file 3: Video walkthrough of the Casebook application in
use. This video (QuickTime format, 4m00s in duration) contains a
walkthrough of the Casebook application in use. In the walkthrough, a
short example case is chosen from the list of available cases, and is
navigated through until the end of the first section of the case.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
The project was conceived by MDB, KMS, and AH. The Casebook application
was developed by MDB. The final paper was read and approved by all
authors.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Dr. med. Johannes Bernhardt-Melischnig for his medical
expertise when creating the example patient case.
Author details
1Institute for Medical Informatics, Statistics, and Documentation, Medical
University of Graz, Auenbruggerplatz 2, Graz 8036, Austria. 2Institute of
Information Systems and Computer Media, Graz University of Technology,
Inffeldgasse 16c, Graz 8010, Austria.
Received: 5 October 2013 Accepted: 31 July 2014
Published: 7 August 2014
References
1. Huang G, Reynolds R, Candler C: Virtual patient simulation at US and
Canadian medical schools. Acad Med 2007, 82(5):446–451.
Bloice et al. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 2014, 14:66 Page 8 of 9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6947/14/66
2. Ellaway R, Poulton T, Fors U, McGee J, Albright S: Building a virtual patient
commons. Med Teach 2008, 30(2):170–174.
3. Salminen H, Zary N, Björklund K, Toth-Pal E, Leanderson C: Virtual patients
in primary care: developing a reusable model that fosters reflective
practice and clinical reasoning. J Med Internet Res 2014, 16(1):e3.
4. Bowen J: Educational strategies to promote clinical diagnostic reasoning.
N Engl J Med 2006, 355(21):2217–2225.
5. Norman G, Dore K, Krebs J, Neville A: The power of the plural: effect of
conceptual analogies on successful transfer. Acad Med 2007,
82(10 Suppl):S16 –S18.
6. Bordage G: Why did I miss the diagnosis? Some cognitive explanations
and educational implications. Acad Med 1999, 74(10 Suppl):S138 –S143.
7. Goldacre M, Lambert T, Evans J, Turner G: Preregistration house officers'
views on whether their experience at medical school prepared them
well for their jobs: national questionnaire survey. BMJ 2003,
326(7397):1011–1012.
8. Cave J, Goldacre M, Lambert T, Woolf K, Jones A, Dacre J: Newly qualified
doctors' views about whether their medical school had trained them
well: questionnaire surveys. BMC Med Educ 2007, 7:38.
9. Ochsmann E, Zier U, Drexler H, Schmid K: Well prepared for work? Junior
doctors' self-assessment after medical education. BMC Med Educ 2011,
11:99.
10. Cook DA, Erwin PJ, Triola MM: Computerized virtual patients in health
professions education: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Acad Med
2010, 85(10):1589–1602.
11. Bloice MD, Simonic KM, Holzinger H: On the usage of health records for
the design of virtual patients: a systematic review. BMC Med Inform Decis
Mak 2013, 13:103.
12. Whitcomb M: Ambulatory-based clinical education: Flexner revisited.
Acad Med 2006, 81(2):105–106.
13. Holzinger A, Kickmeier-Rust MD, Wassertheurer S, Hessinger M: Learning
performance with interactive simulations in medical education: Lessons
learned from results of learning complex physiological models with the
HAEMOdynamics SIMulator. Comput Educ 2009, 52(2):292–301.
14. Holzinger A, Emberger W, Wassertheurer S, Neal L: Design, development
and evaluation of online interactive simulation software for learning
human genetics. Elektr Infor (e&i) 2008, 125(5):190–196.
15. Zary N, Hege I, Heid J, Woodham L, Donkers J, Kononowicz AA: Enabling
Interoperability, Accessibility and Reusability of Virtual Patients Across
Europe - Design and Implementation. In Proceedings of the twenty-second
International Conference on Medical Informatics Europe: 30 August –
2 September 2009. Edited by Adlassnig KP, Mantas J, Masic I. Sarajevo: Ios
Press; 2009:826 –830.
16. eViP Electronic Virtual Patients. http://www.virtualpatients.eu.
17. Ziv A, Small S, Wolpe P: Patient safety and simulation-based medical
education. Med Teach 2000, 22(5):489–495.
18. Ziv A, Ben-David S, Ziv M: Simulation based medicaleducation: an opportunity
to learn from errors.Med Teach 2005, 27(3):193–199.
19. Britton M: Diagostic errors discovered at autopsy. Acta Med Scand 1974,
196(1–6):203–210.
20. Winters B, Custer J, Galvagno SM, Colantuoni E, Kapoor SG, Lee HW, Goode V,
Robinson K, Nakhasi A, Pronovost P, Newman-Toker D: Diagnostic errors in
the intensive care unit: a systematic review of autopsy studies. BMJ Qual Saf
2012, 21:894–902.
21. Rouf E, Chumley HS, Dobbie AE: Electronic health records in outpatient
clinics: perspectives of th ird year medical students. BMC Med Educ
2008, 8:13.
22. Lee P, Hunter TB, Taljanovic M: Musculoskeletal colloquialisms: how did
we come up with these names? Radiographics 2004, 24(4):1009–1027.
23. Hirsh D, Ogur B, Thibault G, Cox M: “Continuity” as an organizing principle
for clinical education reform. N Engl J Med 2007, 356(8):858–866.
24. Bloice MD, Simonic KM, Kreuzthaler M, Holzinger A: Development of an
interactive application for learning medical procedures and clinical
decision making. In In Information Quality in e-Health. Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 2011:211 –224.
25. Holzinger A, Treitler P, Slany W: Making Apps Useable on Multiple
Different Mobile Platforms: On Interoperability for Business Application
Development on Smartphones. In Multidisciplinary Research and Practice for
Information Systems, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, LNCS 7465 ;
2012:176–189.
26. Oliven A, Nave R, Gilad D, Barch A: Implementation of a web-based interactive
virtual patient case simulation as a training and assessment tool for medical
students.Stud Health Technol Inform2011, 169:233–237.
27. Ammannagari N, Chikoti S, Bravin E: Hodgkin's lymphoma presenting as a
complex paraneoplastic neurological syndrome: a case report. J Med
Case Rep 2013, 7:96.
28. Jaquith A: Apple’s iPhone and iPad: secure enough for business? In
Forrester Research ; 2010. URL: http:// www.forrester.com/Apples+iPhone+And+
iPad+Secure+Enough+For+Business/fulltext/-/E-RES57240?objectid=RES57240.
29. Nirenburg S, McShane M, Beale S, Jarrell B, Fantry G: Integrating cognitive
simulation into the maryland virtual patient. Stud Health Technol Inform
2009, 142(17):224–229.
30. Eva K: What every teacher needs to know about clinical reasoning. Med
Educ 2005, 39(1):98–106.
31. Gunning WT, Fors UGH: Virtual patients for assessment of medical
student ability to integrate clinical and laboratory data to develop
differential diagnoses: comparison of results of exams with/without time
constraints. Med Teach 2012, 34(4):e222–e228.
32. Bloice MD, Wotawa F, Holzinger A: Java’s Alternatives and the Limitations
of Java when Writing Cross-Platform Applications for Mobile Devices in
the Medical Domain. In ITI 2009 31st International Conference on
Information Technology Interfaces: June 22-25, 2009. Edited by Luzar-Stiffler V,
Dobric VH, Bekic Z. Cavtat (Croatia): IEEE; 2009:47 –54.
doi:10.1186/1472-6947-14-66
Cite this article as: Bloice et al. : Casebook: a virtual patient iPad
application for teaching decision-making through the use of electronic
health records. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 2014 14:66.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
Bloice et al. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 2014, 14:66 Page 9 of 9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6947/14/66