TITLE: 18  Reprinted from Australian Family Physician Vol. 41, No. 1/2 january/february 2012
AUTHORS: 
YEAR: None
DOI: None

CONTENT:
18  RepRinted fRom AustRAliAn fAmily physiciAn Vol. 41, no. 1/2 jAnuARy/febRuARy 2012
Child development
Teaching in general practice
Andrew Linn 
Carole Khaw 
Hugh Kildea 
Anne Tonkin
Clinical reasoning
A guide to improving teaching and practice
Background
The process of clinical reasoning is undertaken by all 
clinicians, often automatically, and is the cognitive process 
that underlies diagnosis and management of a patient’s 
presenting problem. The teaching of clinical reasoning can 
pose a challenge to the clinical teacher.
Objective
This article reviews the process of clinical reasoning and 
provides the teacher with a framework to teach clinical 
reasoning to students and junior doctors.
Discussion
By considering clinical reasoning as a skill to be learnt rather 
than a concept to be understood, a framework for teaching 
this skill can be developed. The learner initially observes 
a consultation by the teaching clinician, followed by the 
teacher explaining the reasoning processes used including 
hypothesising, hypothesis testing, re-analysis and differential 
diagnosis. The student then comments on the reasoning of the 
teacher in a subsequent consultation, followed by feedback 
from the teacher on the student’s reasoning in a third 
consultation.
Keywords
education, medical; clinical competence; models, educational; 
general practice
 
Clinical reasoning is seemingly as difficult to define as 
it is to teach. Clinicians generally ‘know it when they 
see it’, but rarely stop to consider what is meant by 
it, and more importantly, how to teach it to the next 
generation of clinicians. A definition of clinical reasoning 
includes an ability to integrate and apply different types 
of knowledge, to weigh evidence, critically think about 
arguments and to reflect upon the process used to arrive 
at a diagnosis.1 Clinical reasoning therefore requires not 
only an accumulation of knowledge but also a level of 
experience, which is generally what sets apart a practising 
clinician from a medical student or junior doctor. There is 
also a degree of automation
2–4 that occurs when clinicians 
consult, which to the observing student is difficult to grasp 
and can be a barrier to learning.
Various theories have been proposed relating to how a clinician 
reasons through a clinical consultation and how ‘expert’ clinicians 
reason differently to novice learners. the evolution of these theories 
are described well by elstein,
5 with the most recent being a unified 
‘dual theory’ of clinical reasoning,4 which suggests that clinicians 
use a combination of intuition and analysis in their consultations. the 
general practitioner who sees several patients with upper respiratory 
tract infections every day would very quickly make this diagnosis in 
another patient (experiential/intuition), however if a more unfamiliar 
or unusual patient problem is encountered they may require more 
detailed questioning and analysis of the problem (analysis). novice 
learners, such as medical students, have limited clinical experience 
and therefore need to approach most consultations in a more analytical 
(‘hypothetico-deductive’) way,3,4 and a teaching approach using 
this framework is proposed to assist in the development of clinical 
reasoning ability.
Understanding the clinical reasoning 
process
the clinical consultation is the practical embodiment of the clinical 
reasoning process by which data are gathered, considered, challenged 
and integrated to form a diagnosis that can lead to appropriate 
management. the main components of a clinical consultation, when 
considered in this construct, include:
•	 a	thorough	but	directed	clinical	history,	with	initial	hypothesis 	
RepRinted fRom AustRAliAn fAmily physiciAn Vol. 41, no. 1/2 jAnuARy/febRuARy 2012   19
may wish to encourage students to undertake some basic readings on 
clinical reasoning theory, and to do so themselves. 3–5
frameworks for teaching a clinical skill have been devised, 9–11 
including the peyton model, which uses the four steps of 
demonstration, deconstruction, comprehension and performance. 
An adaptation of this can be used as a model to teaching the skill of 
clinical reasoning across three consultations.
Consultation 1: Demonstration and 
deconstruction
the clinician demonstrates a clinical consultation at normal speed as 
they would in regular practice, taking care to clearly consider a range 
of hypotheses and differential diagnoses in the consultation.
following the consultation, the clinician then deconstructs 
the consultation with the student. this is to assist the student to 
understand what the clinician was thinking and how they were 
reasoning. A deconstructed consultation focusing on the clinical 
reasoning pathway is presented in Figure 1.
generation and subsequent testing through specific questioning
•	 selection	of	a	primary	diagnosis	and	differential	diagnosis	in	order 	
of likelihood
•	 physical	examination	directed	at	gathering	further	data	necessary 	
to confirm or refute the hypotheses
•	 thoughtful	and	critical	selection	of	investigations	to	gather 	
additional data
•	 implementation	of	a	targeted	and	rationalised	management	plan.
the other more hidden aspect of this process is the weighting of 
evidence as provided by a patient:
•	 Is	this	piece	of	data	important	or	irrelevant?
•	 Does	this	piece	of	data	make	the	hypothesis	more	or	less	likely?
•	 How	does	the	data	interrelate	with	the	other	data	already	gathered?
•	 Which	data	is	the	most	critical	(both	positive	and	negative)?
this basic model also informs the theory behind the problem-based 
learning (or case-based learning) approach to teaching medical 
students.
6,7 the majority of academic institutions in Australia are 
utilising these teaching methods as they not only contribute to 
knowledge development, but also encourage the early development of 
diagnostic and communication skills, cultural sensitivity and tolerance 
of uncertainty in clinical practice.
7
Teaching clinical reasoning in the 
consulting room
the process of integrating knowledge and applying it to patient care 
is complex and challenging for students to learn, but is ideally taught 
in a clinical context such as the consulting room. clinical reasoning 
should not be considered as something tacit that students simply 
‘pick up as they go along’, and clinical teachers can greatly enhance 
students’ ability to reason.
clinical reasoning is a skill to be learnt, not unlike driving a car. 
Knowing about the mechanics and understanding the functions of a 
car is quite different to driving one across town in peak hour traffic. 
so too, medical students are armed with knowledge helpful to patient 
diagnosis. but they can find it challenging to know how to navigate 
the information during a patient interaction. junior doctors similarly 
are developing these skills and would benefit from clear guidance on 
the reasoning process.
A proposed strategy for teaching clinical reasoning is therefore 
to teach it within a skill framework in the clinical consultation room. 
this has been used with success by the authors in teaching medical 
students how to reason. A similar strategy has been described 
by Kassirer,
8 designed for larger groups of students, however this 
approach used with a single student would remain beneficial, even 
potentially enhanced. the idea of a ‘coach’ to assist the student 
during an evolving consultation is highlighted as essential to monitor 
the student’s questions and responses and commenting on their 
relevance and accuracy with instant feedback during the consultation. 
there are also arguments for students having a basic understanding 
of the theoretical concepts behind clinical reasoning to improve 
understanding of what they are learning and why. 8 clinical teachers 
Figure 1. Flowchart of a teaching consultation with a 
focus on clinical reasoning
Presenting complaint
Allow the patient to describe their presenting 
symptom(s)
Refine the diagnosis
Primary hypothesis and a differential diagnosis
Consider three or more hypotheses
Consider 
the patient’s 
presenting 
symptom(s) 
and basic 
demographics 
(age, gender)
What are the 
key features of 
each of these 
hypotheses?
What are the 
distinguishing 
features 
of these 
hypotheses?
Continue with history taking
Explain why 
each question 
was asked 
(relating to the 
hypotheses)
Does the new 
data help or 
hinder the 
hypotheses?
Re-prioritise 
the hypotheses 
with each 
new piece of 
information
Physical examination
Consider what findings 
are expected given the 
hypothesis and look for 
them
Relevant positives and 
negatives should refine 
the hypothesis
Relevant investigation
Consider diagnostic 
testing if required
Will the investigation 
confirm or alter your 
hypotheses? If not, is it 
necessary?
Clinical reasoning – a guide to improving teaching and practiceFOCUS
20  RepRinted fRom AustRAliAn fAmily physiciAn Vol. 41, no. 1/2 jAnuARy/febRuARy 2012
considered early.
the benefits of reflecting upon and improving one’s own reasoning 
may include:
•	 improving	time	to	diagnosis
•		 avoiding	assumptions
•	 reducing	unnecessary	investigation	and	the	costs	these	incur
•	 improving	patient	satisfaction	and	being	branded	with	the	  
‘good doctor’ label.
Key points
•		 The	process	of	clinical	reasoning	is	critical	to	making	a	timely	and	
accurate diagnosis in a clinical consultation.
•		 Clinical	reasoning	can	best	be	taught	as	a	skill	within	a	skill-teaching	
framework.
•		 Teaching	clinical	reasoning	encourages	personal	reflection	and	
refinement of the clinician’s own clinical reasoning skills to improve 
patient outcomes.
Authors 
Andrew linn mbbs, dch, fRAcGp , is lecturer in clinical education, 
medicine learning and teaching unit, the university of Adelaide, south 
Australia. andrew.linn@adelaide.edu.au
carole Khaw mbbs, dppf(uK), ibclc, fRAcGp , is lecturer in clinical skills, 
medicine learning and teaching unit, the university of Adelaide, south 
Australia
hugh Kildea mbbs, fRAcGp , dip(obst)RcoG, is clinical skills coordinator 
year 1&2, medicine learning and teaching unit, the university of Adelaide, 
south Australia
Anne tonkin phd, med, fRAcp, is director, medicine learning and teaching 
unit, the university of Adelaide, south Australia.
conflict of interest: none declared.
References
1. Anderson Kj. factors affecting the development of undergraduate medical stu-
dents’ clinical reasoning ability. phd thesis. the university of Adelaide, 2006;1–4.
2. lesgold A. context-specific requirements for models of expertise. in: evans 
dA, patel Vl, editors. cognitive science in medicine: biomedical modeling. 
cambridge, mA: mit press, 1989.
3. harasym ph, t sai tc, hemmati p. current trends in developing medical students’ 
critical thinking abilities. Kaosiung journal of medical sciences 2008;24:341–55.
4. croskerry p . A universal model of diagnostic reasoning. Acad med 2009;84:1022–8.
5. elstein As. thinking about diagnostic thinking: a 30-year perspective. Adv health 
sci educ theory pract 2009;14:7–18.
6. barrows hs, t amblyn Rm. problem-based learning – an approach to medical 
education. new york: springer publishing company, 1980.
7.	 Koh	GCH,	Khoo	HE,	Wong	ML,	et	al.	The	effects	of	problem-based	learning	
during medical school on physician competency: a systematic review. cmAj 
2008;178:34–41.
8. Kassirer jp. teaching clinical reasoning: cased-based and coached. Acad med 
2010;85:1118–24.
9.	 Walker	M,	Peyton	JWR.	Teaching	in	theatre.	In:	Peyton	JWR,	editor.	Teaching	
and learning in medical practice. Rickmansworth, uK: manticore europe limited, 
1998;171–80.
10. lake fR, hamdorf jm. t eaching on the run tips 5: teaching a skill. med j Aust 
2004;181:327–8.
11. George jh, doto fX. A simple five-step method for teaching clinical skills. fam 
med 2001;33:577–8.
Consultation 2: Comprehension
following the demonstration and deconstruction phase, the next 
consultation should again be performed by the teaching clinician, 
but with the student actively tracking the consultation and outlining 
the clinical reasoning being demonstrated. this can follow a similar 
structure to that outlined in Figure 1, with the teacher pausing to allow 
the student to explain what is happening. for example:
•	 After	the	patient’s	presenting	complaint,	the	clinician	pauses	to	allow	
the student to list three or more hypotheses (differential diagnoses)
•	 The	student	then	briefly	outlines	these	conditions,	in	particular	the	
key features and distinguishing features of each, and the clinician 
then proceeds to enquire about these features to the patient 
(including any others that are important but not considered by the 
student)
•	 The	clinician	may	pause	after	certain	critical	questions	to	ask	the	
student	‘Why	did	I	ask	that?’	or	after	a	patient	response	to	ask	‘How	
does	that	affect	the	hypotheses?’
•	 Continue	working	through	the	consultation	as	above,	and	allow	
the student to determine the primary hypothesis and differential 
diagnosis following the history taking
•	 Ask	the	student	which	physical	examination	findings	would	be	
expected (positive and negative) given these hypotheses, and 
examine for them
•	 Ask	the	student	which	definitive	or	helpful	investigations	would	be	
warranted following these findings, and to explain what the results 
would mean.
Consultation 3: Performance
the student should now be familiar with how the clinician reasons 
through a clinical consultation. in the third consultation, the student 
follows the model outlined in the first and second consultations 
(Figure 1) by performing the history, physical examination and directing 
investigations, explaining to the clinical teacher their reasoning as they 
proceed. if the student’s reasoning is unclear, the clinical teacher can 
interject	with	questions	such	as	‘Why	did	you	ask	that?’	or	‘How	does	
that	information	help	you?’	to	keep	the	student	on	track.
Clinical reasoning and impact on 
practice
teaching clinical reasoning also provides an excellent opportunity 
for clinicians to consider and review their own clinical reasoning 
pathways. Automation of clinical reasoning allows clinicians to 
undertake consultations in a timely and streamlined fashion, but 
does so at the risk of missing critical information, and therefore the 
diagnosis, if care is not taken.3,5
A different situation resulting in the same risk can arise for clinicians 
seeing a long-term patient and failing to consider alternate diagnoses 
other than those previously made in the patient. A diagnosis that could 
have been made with a careful history and physical examination in one 
consultation may end up taking two or three consultations and several 
unnecessary investigations to reach if differential diagnoses are not 