TITLE: How we created virtual patient cases for primary care-based learning
AUTHORS: E. C. Adams, C. J. Rodgers, R. Harrington, M. D. B. Young, V. K. Sieber
YEAR: 2011
DOI: 10.3109/0142159x.2011.544796

CONTENT:
2011; 33: 273–278
HOW WE ...
How we created virtual patient cases for
primary care-based learning
E. C. ADAMS 1, C. J. RODGERS 1, R. HARRINGTON 1, M. D. B. YOUNG 2 & V. K. SIEBER 3
1John Radcliffe Hospital, UK, 2University of Oxford, UK, 3University of Surrey, UK
Introduction
Virtual patient (VP) cases have been defined as ‘interactive
computer simulations of real-life clinical scenarios for the
purpose of medical training, education or assessment’ (Ellaway
et al. 2006). VP cases are particularly valuable for the
construction of clinical reasoning skills, which are notoriously
challenging to teach (Balla & Edwards 1986).
We present our preliminary experiences and early appli-
cation of a selection of video-enriched VP cases designed to
meet some of the specific pedagogical challenges of under-
graduate education in primary care. The VP cases give
students opportunities to practise and refine unique clinical
reasoning skills typically deployed by general practitioners
(GPs) (Balla & Edwards 1986).
Tailored VP cases have been created for a variety of
specialties ranging from geriatrics to paediatrics (Orton &
Mulhausen 2008; Gill et al. 2010). Clinical reasoning differs
between medical specialities; in particular, GPs draw on
unique strategies (Heneghan et al. 2009), which may not be
explicitly taught. VP cases can be used to multiply patient
encounters providing a bank of verbal and non-verbal
experiences (Cook & Triola 2009) which may accelerate
acquisition of targeted clinical reasoning skills. VP scenarios
are currently used in some areas of primary care education,
such as maintenance of certification examinations (American
Board of Family Medicine) (Sumner & Hagen 2008) and to
quantify variability in primary care physician decision making
(e.g. assessing qualified GPs in the treatment of depression in
standardised VPs) (Hooper et al. 2008).
Diagnostic strategies employed by GPs have recently been
defined (Heneghan et al. 2009), providing some clear learning
outcomes to instruct VP case design. Little is reported in the
literature about how GPs acquire their clinical reasoning skills,
but experience is likely to have an important role (Heneghan
et al. 2009). During the consultation, GPs generate prompt
diagnostic hypotheses (Elstein et al. 1972). Fast hypothesis
generation often depends on prior experience allowing ‘ spot
diagnosis’o r‘ pattern recognition ’. We chose to use real
patient videos as the basis of our VP cases to provide a virtual
‘prior experience’ to enable these strategies. Genuine patient
videos also offer experience in the interpretation of patient
narrative such as a ‘ classic history’ or patients ‘ self-reporting’o f
a diagnosis which GPs also draw on to make diagnoses
(Heneghan et al. 2009).
Video enrichment of VP cases has previously been shown
to be beneficial. One study found that users develop enhanced
cognitive and meta-cognitive processing when using video-
enriched cases compared to text alone (Balslev et al. 2010).
The advantages of using video cases to educate non-experts in
diagnostic strategies for paediatrics were recently highlighted;
patient video cases were found to ‘ strongly stimulate clinical
diagnostic reasoning processes ’ (Balslev et al. 2010).
GPs use further strategies such as ‘ restricted rule-outs ’ and
‘ probabilistic reasoning ’ to refine their initial diagnosis
(Heneghan et al. 2009). The strategy of ‘ restricted rule-outs ’
involves synthesising a short list of serious diagnoses which
must be excluded. Key questions then elicit symptoms
suggestive of these diagnoses ( red flags ). For ‘ probabilistic
reasoning’, clinicians estimate a pre-test probability of a
patient having a particular pathology and then adjust this
probability in the light of test results. Diagnostic decision tree
software can be used to create VP cases that give virtual
experience of these real-time clinical reasoning techniques.
Follow-up of and reflection on patients is a powerful
discipline for the learning and construction of clinical
reasoning skills (Kassirer 2010), but this is limited by short
Practice points
. The unique diagnostic approaches used by GPs tend not
to be explicitly taught to medical students.
. VP cases can be tailored using decision-making software
to give students experience of primary care specific
clinical reasoning skills.
. Collection, over time, of patient videos provides a
valuable resource for enrichment of VP cases and should
be encouraged.
. Our suggested ‘toolkit for success’ can be used as a
starting point for developing projects which use patient
videos.
Correspondence: C.J. Rodgers, Medical Sciences Office, John Radcliffe Hospital, Headington, Oxford, OX3 9DU, UK. Tel: 01865 221689; fax: 01865
750 750; email: caroline@rodgers.org.uk
ISSN 0142–159X print/ISSN 1466–187X online/11/040273–6 /C2232011 Informa UK Ltd. 273
DOI: 10.3109/0142159X.2011.544796
student rotations. VP cases can be used to compress time,
allowing students to observe strategies such as ‘ test of time ’o r
‘ test of treatment ’ which GPs may use to define their diagnosis
(Heneghan et al. 2009). This compression of time also allows
the evolution of chronic disease, longitudinal management and
treatment effects to be illustrated.
On the basis of our preliminary experience and early
application of a series of VP cases, we outline our methods for
designing and utilising video enriched VP cases and describe
how we tailored the cases to promote the acquisition of
primary care specific clinical reasoning skills.
How we created the VP cases
VP case selection
We identified key core curriculum topics from the University of
Oxford’s undergraduate primary care syllabus and selected
dyspepsia, low back pain, dysuria and cardiovascular disease
for VP case development. In addition to their core nature,
these topics were also selected for their amenability for the
inclusion of the clinical reasoning strategies outlined above.
We do not see this as a comprehensive case list, but rather as a
series for pilot study, proof of concept and proof of value.
VP case design
Undergraduate primary care rotations are often short. This
means that students are unlikely to observe consultations or
meet patients suffering from all of the core curricular presen-
tations to primary care. The aim of our video enriched VP
cases is to simulate GP consultations revolving around these
core presentations, giving students the opportunity to be active
participants in the consultations in a virtual way. Table 1 shows
how the various primary care specific diagnostic strategies
have guided VP case design.
The VP cases are principally intended for self-directed
learning, but could also be used as a teaching tool in a small
group or lecture setting. On average, each VP case has
10 questions, comprised of a mixture of true/false questions
and multiple best answer questions. The VP cases are linear in
design meaning that all students will attempt all questions, but
there are optional extra activities e.g. considering a clip of a
patient describing their attempts to quit smoking in the
cardiovascular disease prevention case. Participants also
have the autonomy to repeat video clips or skip them
according to their preferences. The average time taken for a
student to complete a case is approximately 10 min.
An outline ( prototype) for each case was drawn up to
include essential content from the syllabus and key elements
to a consultation on this topic. Quandary (http://
www.halfbakedsoftware.com/) was chosen from among alter-
native systems for creating and delivering the decision-making
scenarios (e.g. Labyrinth – http://labyrinth.mvm.ed.ac.uk/ and
SBL Interactive – http://www.sblinteractive.org/) because of
its usability and the ease with which it could be customised to
create cases. Importantly, it allows a decision tree to be
constructed with multiple ways of reaching the same result,
with penalties applied for wrong answers.
VP video collection and edition
We utilised recordings from the patient video library of a GP
educator (RH) and also made new recordings to fill content
gaps, with the advantage that we could pre-plan questions to
elicit content-specific responses related to our prototype
decision trees. Valid consent was obtained from all patients
to use their video for educational purposes within the
university virtual learning environment.
Videos were edited (Apple iMovie) and compressed as
Flash video, to an appropriate bit rate for web delivery.
The appropriate size varies according to the web delivery
system used, but most clips were 1–3 MB with a maximum size
of 10 MB.
VP case review
Before VP case upload, a review process was undertaken; an
independent GP educator reviewed the cases for content
accuracy and appropriateness. A member of the university
learning technologies team reviewed the technological
aspects. Given that the VP cases were intended for
self-directed student learning, we asked four students to
individually attempt the cases to ensure usability before
uploading the cases to the virtual learning environment.
Feedback on the VPs
Feedback was collected on the accessibility, popularity and
any perceived disadvantages of each VP case. A free text box
(to allow open ended responses) formed the final page of each
case. In addition to qualitative feedback, quantitative data
were collected on the proportion of students reaching the
feedback page (meaning they finished the case) and the
number of attempts made at each case per student.
What’s next ... ?
In the light of our experiences, we highlight a number of
challenges and future directions for the development of
primary care VPs.
Content for VPs
We can speculate intuitively that certain topics, particularly
with distinctive visual cues or classic patient narratives, would
gain more value from patient video enrichment. Common
presenting complaints should be prioritised along with rarer
cases which are easily missed without prior experience. There
is an unanswered question relating to when video recording of
a consultation becomes inappropriate (e.g. recording acutely
unwell patients and sensitive topic areas such as sexual and
mental health issues), good guidance can be found at
http://www.cherri.mvm.ed.ac.uk/cherri.pdf
Quality and availability of patient videos is a limiting factor.
We want to encourage GPs to collect patient videos for
educational purposes. A bank of patient video clips built up
over time, associated with appropriate consent (see below),
could be an invaluable resource to enable similar projects.
E. C. Adams et al.
274
Table 1. Distribution of diagnostic strategies across the four VP scenarios.
Diagnostic strategy VP topic
Cardiovascular Dyspepsia
Urinary tract
infection Low back pain
Spot diagnosis Video clip of patient
with hypothyroidism;
overweight, dry skin,
wearing many layers
of clothing, hoarse
voice, slow relaxing
reflexes
Video clip of patient
experiencing dys-
peptic symptoms
and captured
belching
Male working in manual
labour
Pattern recognition Video clip of patient
with hyperthyroidism
following amiodar-
one treatment; hot
flushes, palpitations,
anxiety, weight loss
Video of patient
describing oesopha-
geal pain as
opposed to cardiac
pain
Patient describing typi-
cal UTI symptoms:
‘when I go to the
toilet it really really
hurts, like a sharp
pain in my bladder.
Its very strong col-
ouring. When I’m
working I have to go
to the toilet about a
million times a day,
which is really
annoying’
Question relating to
pattern of sinister
back pains e.g.
cauda equina syn-
drome, lateral disc
prolapse/root lesion,
malignant back pain
Patient self-report Video clip of patient
self-reporting ‘ I
thought I was having
a heart attack ’
Patient describing that
they were previously
diagnosed with a
duodenal ulcer
Video clip of patient
self-reporting ‘ I have
got one of my urine
infections’
Patient asked ‘what do
you think might be
causing the back
pain’
Patient responds ‘my
mum had a slipped
disc, so I was wor-
ried it might be a
hereditary thing’
Classic presenting complaint Video clip of patient
describing myocar-
dial infarction symp-
toms; chest pain,
crushing, sweating,
sense of impending
doom. ‘I knew
something wasn’t
right’
Patient describing pro-
gressive dysphagia
first noticed with
liquid and now with
solids
Video clips of two dif-
ferent females
describing urinary
symptoms.
Distinguish which
patient has the more
typical symptoms for
a UTI
Patient report ‘I was at
work. I just couldn’t
move. It was very
tight.’ ‘24/7 I’ve got
an ache’ ‘its really
difficult to sit down
for any length of
time’
Restricted rule outs Chest pain; key ques-
tions in the history to
rule out ‘do not
miss’ differentials.
Investigations to rule
out MI e.g. 12 h
troponin, ECG
Model questions to rule
out sinister causes
of dysphagia e.g.
odynophagia, pro-
gressive nature,
worse with solids
than liquids, con-
stant vs. intermittent
Model sexual history for
UTI to rule out sex-
ually transmitted
infection
Investigations in back
pain e.g. bone pro-
file, myeloma
screen, indications
for MRI to exclude
disc prolapse
Red flags Red flags for cardiac
chest pain; exer-
tional, radiating,
associated with
nausea, patient
reports sense of
impending doom
Dyspepsia as a red flag
for malignancy:
decisions over who
should be referred
for endoscopy (NICE
guidelines)
Recognition of symp-
toms are not con-
sistent with a simple
UTI e.g. flank pain,
change in vaginal
discharge, halluci-
nations, prolonged
symptoms, recur-
rent UTI
Red flags for sinister
low back pain; e.g.
sphincter distur-
bance, night pain,
leg weakness, pre-
vious diagnosis of
malignancy.
Video clip model ques-
tions to exclude
cauda equina
syndrome
Probabilistic reasoning ECG showing inferior
ST elevation
Myocardial infarction
to confirm diagnosis
Effect of risk factors on
pre-test probability.
Identify risk factors
e.g. smoking, caf-
feine consumption,
medications,
corticosteroids
Effect of positive or
negative urinary dip-
stick on probability
of UTI
Examination in low back
pain and how this
effects likelihood of
mechanical back
pain e.g. weakness,
sensory distur-
bance, abnormal
reflexes
(continued )
Virtual patient cases for education in primary care
275
Content accuracy is another challenge. Concern exists that
e-learning resources lack adequate peer-review (Ruiz et al.
2007). We recommend using two separate reviewers to
analyse the content and the technological/usability aspects.
Previous authors have recommended developing training and
guidelines for reviewers (Ruiz et al. 2007), but this is ambitious
for a small project. Instead generic guidelines such as those
produced by eVIP (http://www.virtualpatients.eu/) can be
used in order to standardise quality.
Consent for VPs
A perceived advantage of VPs is their suitability for sharing via
the internet (e.g. Jorum/Open Jorum – http://www.jorum.
ac.uk/, Merlot-http://www.merlot.org/merlot/index.htm,
http://www.virtualpatients.eu/). This pilot project has raised
important questions relating to consent for internet access to
genuine patient videos.
VP cases are labour intensive to design, and, as such,
we envisage the potential for sharing resources across educa-
tional institutions, but this is dependent on authors acquiring
robust consent. The Common Healthcare Educational
Recordings Reusability Infrastructure – Practice,
Interoperability and Ethics (CHERRI) project carried out a
survey on current practice in sharing clinical recordings and
explored the medico-legal context (http://www.cherri.mvm.e-
d.ac.uk/cherri.pdf). They went on to develop a common
consent and licensing model for clinical recordings, which
they hope will be widely adopted and is a fail proof approach
for future video enriched VP case authors. In addition, the
results of the MEDEV open educational resources project will
be very helpful in this regard (http://www.medev.ac.uk/oer/).
Evaluation of VPs
During this pilot project, we collected data from three cohorts
of students on the 6-week primary care rotation.
Approximately one-third of students of all potential students
used the cases, giving a total of 82 students who used the
cases. We received positive responses with comments, such as
‘ I liked the real patients! ’, ‘ interactive with patient videos ’.
Some commented that they found the scenarios useful for
developing consulting skills e.g. ‘ Good tips e.g. asking if could
be pregnant before prescribing ’, ‘ Videos were useful to pick-up
how to phrase questions .’
Patterns of student use give us some insight into how
students were interacting with the VPs. Firstly, we observe that
students are multiple users; the average number of attempts at
each scenario per student is greater than 1, and consecutive
attempts occur on different days. This suggests that students
may be using the VPs in a formative manner. They can
compare their scores on each attempt to map their progress
and identify ongoing knowledge/application gaps. Secondly,
we observed higher student usage towards the end of their
primary care rotation, indicating that they are using the VP
cases for revision purposes.
Table 1. Continued.
Diagnostic strategy VP topic
Cardiovascular Dyspepsia
Urinary tract
infection Low back pain
Test of treatment Patient treated with
amiodarone and
develops hyperthy-
roidism; therefore
need to change to
alternative agent
Knowledge of standard
treatment regimens
for Helicobacter
pylori
Video clip of patient
‘well I’ve got a urine
infection, but I have
had two sets of tab-
lets for two weeks
and they haven’t
worked’
Patient then describes
symptoms that are
not consistent with
UTI e.g. bloating,
feeling sick, back
pain. No urinary
symptoms
Video of patient
describing his anal-
gesic treatment
pathway. 6/52 trial
of analgesia
Test of time NICE guidance – if
symptoms persist
for more than 6/52
consider referral
Video clip modelling
safety netting for
symptoms suggest-
ing pyelonephritis
Model explanation of
the aetiology of
mechanical back
pain. Safety netting if
symptoms evolve.
Follow up if not
improved in 6
weeks.
Follow up/referral to secondary care Patient describes
coming into the GP
surgery and then
being sent straight
to A þ E after an
abnormal ECG in
general practice
Test of knowledge of
NICE guidelines for
referral to secondary
care
Recognition of a com-
plicated UTI to be
referred e.g. male,
children, recurrent
Indications for referral
e.g. limb weakness,
abnormal neurologi-
cal examination,
bony tenderness
E. C. Adams et al.
276
Kirkpatrick defined four levels of evaluation for educational
interventions with increasing value (Kirkpatrick & Kirkpatrick,
2006). Our analysis of student attitudes equates to only level 1
feedback. Important further work will involve developing tools
for measuring the effect of these cases on student performance
( particularly in clinical reasoning skills), student behaviour
( particularly relating to diagnostic strategies used) and patient
health and satisfaction. It is a priority for us to establish
whether the theoretical benefits of VP cases for acquisition of
primary care-related clinical reasoning skills can be observed.
Conclusion
We have shown how genuine patient video clips can be
collected and integrated into decision-making software. We
have used this approach to VP case design to create a learning
resource for undergraduate primary care education with the
aim of enhancing acquisition of primary care specific clinical
reasoning skills. We also believe that this targeted approach
to VP case design has wider application. By sharing our expe-
riences, we hope to encourage others to undertake similar
projects. By adopting an educated approach to consent and
licensing, there is potential for generating a bank of
peer-reviewed resources for early development of primary
care specific clinical reasoning skills.
A ‘toolkit for success’
Drawing on our own experiences in this project, we have
produced a ‘toolkit’ which describes the components of a good
video library and the processes involved in turning them from
library clip to VP case learning module. We intend this to be
used as a brief practical guide for those interested in creating
similar VP cases (Figure 1). Centred on a comprehensive video
library and using appropriate technological tools, we believe
the case can be made for developing VP cases tailored for
primary care education.
Figure 1. A ‘toolkit for success’ for those interested in creating similar VPs.
Virtual patient cases for education in primary care
277
Declaration of interest: The authors report no conflicts of
interest. The authors alone are responsible for the content and
writing of the paper.
Notes on contributors
EMILY ADAMS, MA Oxon, BMBch, studied graduate-entry medicine at the
University of Oxford after a Bachelor’s degree in Biological Sciences, Post
Graduate Certificate in Education and is working as a secondary school
teacher.
CAROLINE RODGERS MChem, DPhil, BMBCh studied graduate-entry
medicine at the University of Oxford after gaining a Master’s degree in
Chemistry and a DPhil in Biological Inorganic Chemistry from the
University of Oxford.
RICHARD HARRINGTON BA, MBBS, DCH, DGM, DRCOG, MRCGP is an
associate course director for the University of Oxford’s graduate-entry
medicine course, a practising GP in Oxfordshire and has a first degree in
Drama and English.
DAMION YOUNG MSc, PhD is an educational technologist who leads
Learning Technologies for the Medical Sciences Division at the University
of Oxford.
VIVIEN SIEBER BSc, PhD, MA is currently the Head of Learning and
Research Support and Development, University of Surrey, Guildford.
References
Balla JI, Edwards HM. 1986. Some problems in teaching clinical decision-
making. Med Educ 20:487–491.
Balslev T, de Grave WS, Muijtjens AMM, Scherpbier AJJA. 2010. Enhancing
diagnostic accuracy among nonexperts through use of video cases.
Pediatrics 125:e570–e576.
Cook DA, Triola MM. 2009. Virtual patients: A critical literature review and
proposed next steps. Med Educ 43:303–311.
Ellaway R, Candler C, Greene P, Smothers V. 2006. An architectural model
for medBiquitous virtual patients. In: Group MVPW, Smothers V, editor.
Baltimore.
Elstein AS, Kagan N, Shulman LS, Jason H, Loupe MJ. 1972.
Methods and theory in the study of medical inquiry. J Med Educ
47:85–92.
Gill P, Kitney L, Kozan D, Lewis M. 2010. Online learning in
paediatrics: A student-led web-based learning modality. Clin Teach
7:53–57.
Heneghan C, Glasziou P, Thompson M, Rose P, Balla J, Lasserson D,
Scott C, Perera R. 2009. Diagnostic strategies used in primary care.
BMJ 338:b946.
Hooper LM, Weinfurt KP, Cooper LA, Mensh J, Harless W, Kuhajada MC,
Epstein SA. 2008. Virtual standardized patients: An interactive method
to examine variation in depression care among primary care physicians.
Prim Health Care Res Dev 1:257–268.
Kassirer JP. 2010. Teaching clinical reasoning: Case-based and coached.
Acad Med 85:1118–1124.
Kirkpatrick DL, Kirkpatrick JD. 2006. Evaluating training programmes:
The four levels. San Franscisco: Berrett-Koehler Publishers.
Orton E, Mulhausen P. 2008. E-learning virtual patients for geriatric
education. Gerontol Geriatr Educ 28:73–88.
Ruiz JG, Candler C, Teasdale TA. 2007. Peer reviewing
e-learning: Opportunities, challenges, and solutions. Acad Med
82:503–507.
Sumner W, Hagen MD. 2008. Value of information in virtual patients
portraying pharyngitis. AMIA Annu Symp Proc 6:1150.
E. C. Adams et al.
278
Copyright of Medical Teacher is the property of Taylor & Francis Ltd and its content may not be copied or
emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.
However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.