TITLE: The influence of medical students selfexplanations on diagnostic performance
AUTHORS: Martine Chamberland, Christina St‐Onge, Jean Setrakian, Luc Lanthier, Linda Bergeron, Annick Bourget, Silvia Mamede, Henk Schmidt, Remy Rikers
YEAR: 2011
DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2923.2011.03933.x

CONTENT:
The inﬂuence of medical students’ self-explanations
on diagnostic performance
Martine Chamberland,1 Christina St-Onge,1 Jean Setrakian,1 Luc Lanthier,1 Linda Bergeron,2
Annick Bourget,3 Silvia Mamede,4 Henk Schmidt4 & Remy Rikers 4
CONTEXT Skill in clinical reasoning is a highly
valued attribute of doctors, but instructional
approaches to foster medical students’ clinical
reasoning skills remain scarce. Self-explanation
is an instructional procedure, the positive
effects of which on learning have been
demonstrated in a variety of domains, but
which remain largely unexplored in medical
education.
OBJECTIVES The purpose of this study was to
investigate the effects of self-explanation on
students’ learning of clinical reasoning during
clerkships and to examine whether these effects
are affected by topic familiarity.
METHODS An experimental study with a
training phase and an assessment phase was
conducted with 36 Year 3 medical students,
randomly assigned to one of two groups. In the
training phase, students solved 12 clinical cases
(four cases on a less familiar topic; four on a
more familiar topic; four on ﬁller topics), either
generating self-explanations (n = 18) or not
(n = 18). The self-explanations were generated
after minimal instructions and no feedback was
provided to students. One week later, in the
assessment phase, students were requested to
diagnose 12 different, more difﬁcult cases, sim-
ilarly distributed among the same more familiar
topic, less familiar topic and ﬁller topics, and
their diagnostic performance was assessed.
RESULTS In the training phase the
performance of the two groups did not differ.
However, in the assessment phase 1 week later,
a signiﬁcant interaction was found between
self-explanation and case topic familiarity
(F
1,34 = 6.18, p < 0.05). Students in the self-
explanation condition, compared with those in
the control condition, demonstrated better
diagnostic performance on subsequent clinical
cases, but this effect emerged only for cases
concerning the less familiar topic.
CONCLUSIONS The present study shows the
beneﬁcial inﬂuence of generating self-explana-
tions when dealing with less familiar clinical
contexts. Generating self-explanations without
feedback resulted in better diagnostic perfor-
mance than in the control group at 1 week after
the intervention.
improving performance
Medical Education 2011: 45: 688–695
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2923.2011.03933.x
1Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,
University of Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada
2Health Sciences Education Center, Faculty of Medicine and Health
Sciences, University of Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada
3Department of Rehabiliation, Faculty of Medicine and Health
Sciences, University of Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada
4Department of Psychology, Erasmus University, Rotterdam,
the Netherlands
Correspondence: Dr Martine Chamberland, Department of Medicine,
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Sherbrooke,
Sherbrooke, Quebec J1H 5N4, Canada. Tel: 00 1 819 346 1110, ext.
15385; Fax: 00 1 819 820 6815; E-mail: martine.chamberland@
usherbrooke.ca
688 ª Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2011. MEDICAL EDUCATION 2011; 45: 688–695
INTRODUCTION
The ability to make sound clinical judgements is
considered one of the most valuable attributes of a
doctor, and developing students’ clinical reasoning
abilities appears as a central goal in most medical
curricula.
1 High value is attributed to teaching and
learning clinical reasoning, but devising appropriate
instructional approaches has proved to be a difﬁcult
challenge.
1
Teachers confronted with this challenge may beneﬁt
from a better understanding of the nature of clinical
reasoning generated by research on medical expertise
over the last three decades.
1–8 In the course of their
growth towards expertise, medical students have been
shown to progress through transitional stages, char-
acterised by different ways of structuring knowledge in
memory and using it to solve clinical problems.
1,9
Rich causal networks that explain causes and conse-
quences of diseases in terms of underlying patho-
physiological processes characterise the ﬁrst stage of
knowledge organisation. With the repeated applica-
tion of knowledge and, particularly, through exposure
to clinical problems, this knowledge becomes
‘encapsulated’, and illness scripts emerge. Illness
scripts are cognitive structures containing limited
knowledge about causal mechanisms, but large
amounts of clinically relevant information on signs,
symptoms and enabling conditions for the disease as it
occurs in real patients. By relying on such cognitive
structures and on examples of patients previously
seen, expert doctors can quickly generate the most
likely diagnoses for most routine problems.
1,2 In the
course of their medical training, especially through
clinical exposure, students are expected to build up a
large set of illness scripts, which gradually increase
their ability to correctly diagnose patients.
The ﬁndings of research on medical expertise have
led to general suggestions to foster the development
of students’ clinical reasoning skills.
1–4,8 Students
should, for instance, be exposed early to a variety of
examples that provide an accurate representation of
the range of ways in which diseases occur. They
should engage actively in problem solving, reﬂecting
and elaborating on patients’ problems to gradually
build up their knowledge base. Although these and
other general recommendations have been frequently
discussed, instructional approaches to nurturing
students’ clinical reasoning skills are still scarce.
Stimulating students to generate self-explanations
while studying a text has been shown to be effective in
promoting learning in a variety of domains, such as
physics,
10,11 biology,12 electricity and magnetism 13
and chess.14 Self-explanations are remarks made by,
and directed to, oneself, after reading one or more
statements in a text to be learned or a problem to be
solved.
10–12 An example may help to clarify the
concept of self-explanation. Chi and colleagues asked
eighth-grade high school students to generate self-
explanations while reading a text on the human
circulatory system.
12 The following fragment was read
by a student who produced the subsequent remarks:
‘The septum divides the heart lengthwise into two
sides. The right side pumps blood to the lungs, and
the left side pumps blood to the other parts of the
body… ’
‘So the septum is like a wall that divides the heart into
two parts… it kind of like separates it so that the blood
doesn’t get mixed up … ’
12
Self-explanation has been shown to compel learners
to attend to the material in a meaningful way,
triggering several key cognitive processes, namely:
generating inferences based on the information from
the text (e.g. the words in italic in the example given
above); linking pieces of information present in the
study materials; integrating new information into
existing prior knowledge, and restructuring one’s
knowledge representations.
13
It would be reasonable to expect self-explanation to
help medical students in assimilating knowledge
required for clinical reasoning. Engaging in self-
explanation might facilitate knowledge elaboration
and reconstruction, leading to the organisation and
enrichment of illness scripts early in clinical training.
Despite constituting a promising instructional pro-
cedure, self-explanation has not, to our knowledge,
been studied in the context of medical education.
When are students likely to beneﬁt most from self-
explanation? Experimental studies on self-explana-
tion suggest that learning correlates with the number
of self-explanations generated by the student
13 and
the number of inferences these contain. 10,12–14 The
characteristics of clinical problems, which are the
basic learning material for clinical reasoning, are
likely to inﬂuence the effectiveness of self-explana-
tion. A student’s familiarity with the problem may be
of special relevance. After repeated exposure to a
problem, most students will probably hold a well-
deﬁned illness script in their memory, which will be
readily available when they encounter the problem
ª Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2011. MEDICAL EDUCATION 2011; 45: 688–695 689
Inﬂuence of self-explanations on diagnostic performance
again. Less room will be left for the elaboration and
reconstruction of knowledge and, therefore, for self-
explanation to play a role in learning. By contrast,
with less familiar problems, self-explanation may
have a greater effect on learning as students will
generate more inferences and new links, with greater
integration of new information into their prior
knowledge, and enhanced enrichment of their
mental representations.
We hypothesised that the generation of self-explana-
tions while solving clinical problems would facilitate
the acquisition of knowledge required for clinical
reasoning, leading students to give better diagnostic
performance in subsequent similar problems. This
positive effect of self-explanation would either only
occur for, or at least be more substantial for,
problems with which students were less familiar. We
tested these ideas in an experimental study with
medical students in clerkships.
METHODS
Design
The study consisted of two phases: a training phase,
and an assessment phase run 1 week later. In the
training phase, students were asked to solve familiar
and less familiar problems either by generating
self-explanations or without self-explanation. The
primary issue concerned the students’ diagnostic
performance in the assessment phase.
Participants
Participants were 40 medical students from the
University of Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Quebec,
Canada. All participants were in Year 3 of the medical
undergraduate programme, which comprises 4 years,
of which 2.5 years of problem-based learning
(PBL) are followed by 18 months of clerkship.
Participation was voluntary and no ﬁnancial incen-
tives were offered. Written informed consent was
obtained. Data were analysed only for the 36 students
who completed both phases.
Materials
Two sets of 12 cases were used in the study, one for
the training and one for the assessment phase. The
templates for both sets (Appendix 1) were identical
and comprised four cases on a less familiar clinical
topic, four cases on a more familiar clinical topic, and
four ﬁller cases on other clinical topics.
Students’ familiarity with a speciﬁc clinical topic was
determined by prior exposure to clinical problems
related to that topic during the ﬁrst 3 years of their
undergraduate programme. Prior exposure was esti-
mated by the number of PBL tutorial groups
addressing related problems and the relevant clinical
exposure, assessed by disease prevalence in the
setting of the main clinical rotations. Based on this
information, jaundice was chosen as a ‘less familiar’
and heart failure as a ‘more familiar’ topic for Year 3
medical students. Four variant cases of jaundice and
four variant cases of heart failure were constructed.
Four ﬁller cases from four other topics were pro-
duced to complete the set. These cases intercalated
with the study cases in order to avoid an otherwise
obvious sequence of heart failure and jaundice cases.
Cases for the training and assessment phases were
constructed addressing the same topics and sub-
topics (e.g. valvular disease causing heart failure).
However, the ﬁnal diagnoses of the cases differed
between the training and assessment phases. The
cases for the later phase were purposely made more
difﬁcult by including less typical presentations, less
common ﬁnal diagnoses and, sometimes, coexisting
medical conditions.
Case descriptions contained approximately 300 words
and reported the chief complaint, background
information, and ﬁndings from history, physical
examination and laboratory tests. Three senior
internists ⁄ clinical teachers (MC, LL, JS) prepared the
cases. One of these three authors wrote a ﬁrst draft,
which was then revised iteratively by the others. A
pilot test with four clerks who did not participate in
the study showed that the cases were appropriate with
respect to readability, format and difﬁculty level.
In each phase, cases were presented in random order
in a booklet. All booklets started with the same ﬁller
case and no two cases on the same topic appeared
consecutively.
Procedures
In the training phase, participants were randomly
assigned to either the self-explanation (n = 18) or the
comparison (no self-explanation) ( n = 18) group.
Participants in the self-explanation group were tested
individually by the experiment leaders (AB, CS-O,
LB). Firstly, they were provided with a deﬁnition
of self-explanation and an example of the
procedure. To make their task more concrete, each
participant listened to a 7-minute audio example
690 ª Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2011. MEDICAL EDUCATION 2011; 45: 688–695
M Chamberland et al
of self-explanation on a clinical case (mono-arthritis)
which was not used in the study but which was
constructed using a similar format. Subsequently,
participants were asked to read each case and to
generate self-explanations out loud. They received
no feedback on the quality of their self-explanations.
Finally, they wrote down their responses to the
following questions:
Q1 What is the most likely diagnosis?
Q2 What are the two main arguments supporting
this diagnosis?
Q3 List two plausible alternative diagnoses.
The ﬁrst question provided a measure of diagnostic
accuracy; combination of the three questions was
intended to provide a rough measure of the quality of
the diagnostic reasoning.
Procedures for the training phase were pilot-tested
with three clerks who did not participate in the study.
The instructions prompted the participants to self-
explain; 10 minutes were sufﬁcient for students to
work out the problem in all cases. Students in the
control group worked with the booklets in a collec-
tive session. They were requested only to solve the
cases and were not given any instruction on how to
perform self-explanation. They ﬁrst read an example
of a case of mono-arthritis in order to familiarise
themselves with the case and question formats. The
training phase for both the self-explanation and the
comparison group lasted 2.5 hours. All participants
were allowed 10 minutes per case and time was
controlled by the experiment leaders. Three exper-
iment leaders (AB, CS-O, LB) ran all the individual
and group sessions after participating in a
standardisation exercise which aimed to ensure a
uniform procedure. In the assessment phase, all
participants completed the booklets in a group
session. Students from both groups were instructed
to solve the cases in silence. Participants were allowed
2 hours to complete the cases and could move on
to the next case at will. For each case, students were
asked to write down their answers to the same three
questions used in the training phase. At the end of
the session, the students were requested to assess, on
a 10-point Likert scale, their conﬁdence in their
overall diagnostic approaches to jaundice and heart
failure. They were also invited to complete a brief
questionnaire on learning opportunities (current
clinical rotation, individual study time, teaching
activities) during the past week relating to jaundice
and heart failure. Students in the self-explanation
and comparison groups reported similar learning
opportunities.
Data analysis
To evaluate students’ responses, a scoring grid was
developed for each question and iteratively revised by
three senior internists (MC, JS, LL). Final decisions
were reached by consensus. The grid comprises
model answers for each question and possible score.
A score on a scale of 0–2 was given for each answer
according to the correction grid. For example, for the
most likely diagnosis, 1 point was given if only the
general category of diseases was correct (obstructive
jaundice) and 2 points were given if the speciﬁc
diagnosis was correct (choledocholithiasis). The two
main arguments supporting the diagnosis (Q2) and
the two plausible alternative diagnoses (Q3) were
scored similarly. Students who gave no, one or two
arguments or plausible alternative diagnoses con-
tained in the correction grid were awarded 0, 1 or
2 points, respectively. Two scores were derived from
participants’ answers: the diagnostic accuracy score
(the score on Q1), and the diagnostic performance
score (the sum of scores on Q1, Q2 and Q3).
Two independent raters (MC and JS or LL), who were
blinded to the participants’ experimental condition,
scored the responses. Inter-rater reliability, measured
by intra-class correlations, ranged from 0.70 to 0.95.
Disagreements were resolved by discussion.
Descriptive statistics were computed. Two repeated-
measure
ANOVAs with self-explanation (self-explana-
tion versus no self-explanation) as a between-subjects
factor and topic familiarity (less familiar versus more
familiar) as a within-subjects factor were performed
on mean diagnostic accuracy scores and diagnostic
performance scores. Signiﬁcance was set at 0.05 and
Student’s t-tests were performed to tease apart the
source of signiﬁcant interactions.
RESULTS
Training phase
Tables 1 and 2 present, respectively, the mean
diagnostic accuracy scores (Q1) and the mean
diagnostic performance scores (Q1 + Q2 + Q3) for
each group on the less familiar (jaundice) and more
familiar (heart failure) cases in the training phase.
There was no statistically signiﬁcant difference
between the groups in diagnostic accuracy
(F
1,34 = 0.00, p = 1.00) and diagnostic performance
(F1,34 = 0.35, p = 0.56) scores. Differences between
less familiar and more familiar topics in diagnostic
accuracy and diagnostic performance scores were
ª Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2011. MEDICAL EDUCATION 2011; 45: 688–695 691
Inﬂuence of self-explanations on diagnostic performance
statistically signiﬁcant ( F1,34 = 18.58, p < 0.05 and
F1,34 = 24.76, p < 0.05, respectively). These results
show that both groups obtained similar scores at the
beginning of the study. They also indicate that the
jaundice cases were, as predicted, more challenging
for students. This probably reﬂects their limited
familiarity with the topic of jaundice compared with
heart failure, as reﬂected by the fact that scores
on the former were lower than on the latter, and
conﬁrms our distinction between familiar and
less familiar topics.
Assessment phase
Tables 3 and 4 show mean scores for diagnostic
accuracy and diagnostic performance obtained by the
two groups on the less and more familiar topics in
the assessment phase. The main effect of self-
explanation on diagnostic accuracy scores was not
signiﬁcant (F
1,34 = 0.68, p = 0.42), whereas the main
effect of topic familiarity was signiﬁcant
(F
1,34 = 24.73, p < 0.05), indicating that jaundice
cases were in fact more challenging than heart failure
cases. More importantly, a signiﬁcant interaction
effect was observed ( F
1,34 = 6.18, p < 0.05). Post hoc
analysis using Student’s t-test revealed a borderline
difference between the self-explanation group and
the no self-explanation group on the less familiar
topic (t34 = 1.878, p < 0.07) and no signiﬁcant dif-
ference on the familiar topic ( t34 = ) 0.741,
p = 0.46). These results suggest that self-explanation
inﬂuences diagnostic accuracy in the less familiar
topic, but not in the more familiar topic.
Similar ﬁndings were observed for diagnostic perfor-
mance scores. The main effect of self-explanation on
Table 1 Mean diagnostic accuracy scores obtained by the two
groups in the training phase as a function of topic familiarity
Topic
Self-explanation
Yes ( n = 18)
Mean (SD)
No ( n = 18)
Mean (SD)
Less familiar (jaundice) 5.56 (1.38) 5.61 (1.33)
More familiar (heart failure) 6.61 (1.33) 6.56 (0.78)
SD = standard deviation
Table 2 Mean diagnostic performance scores obtained by the
two groups in the training phase as a function of topic
familiarity
Topic
Self-explanation
Yes ( n = 18)
Mean (SD)
No ( n = 18)
Mean (SD)
Less familiar (jaundice) 14.06 (3.19) 14.61 (2.35)
More familiar (heart failure) 16.56 (2.83) 16.83 (1.54)
SD = standard deviation
Table 3 Mean diagnostic accuracy scores obtained by the two
groups in the assessment phase as a function of topic
familiarity
Topic
Self-explanation
Yes ( n = 18)
Mean (SD)
No ( n = 18)
Mean (SD) p-value
Less familiar
(jaundice)
4.28 (1.56) 3.28 (1.78) < 0.07
More familiar
(heart failure)
4.94 (1.11) 5.28 (1.27) 0.46
SD = standard deviation
Table 4 Mean diagnostic performance scores obtained by the
two groups in the assessment phase as a function of topic
familiarity
Topic
Self-explanation
Yes ( n = 18)
Mean (SD)
No ( n = 18)
Mean (SD) p-value
Less familiar
(jaundice)
13.28 (3.30) 10.83 (3.15) < 0.05
More familiar
(heart failure)
15.22 (2.60) 15.67 (1.24) 0.44
SD = standard deviation
692 ª Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2011. MEDICAL EDUCATION 2011; 45: 688–695
M Chamberland et al
diagnostic performance scores was not signiﬁcant
(F1,34 = 1.77, p = 0.19). The main effect of topic
familiarity, however, was signiﬁcant ( F1,34 = 46.94,
p < 0.05). Again, this supports the distinction
between less and more familiar clinical topics. An
interaction effect was observed ( F
1,34 = 8.53,
p < 0.05). Post hoc analysis conducted using
Student’s t-test revealed a signiﬁcant difference
between the self-explanation group and the no
self-explanation group in the less familiar topic
(t
34 = 2.181, p < 0.05) and no signiﬁcant difference
in the familiar topic ( t34 = ) 0.773, p = 0.44). These
results suggest that self-explanation inﬂuences
diagnostic performance scores in less but not more
familiar clinical topics.
A Student’s t-test comparing students’ levels of
conﬁdence in their diagnoses revealed a signiﬁcant
difference between student conﬁdence in an
unfamiliar clinical topic (jaundice) and that in a
familiar clinical topic (heart failure) (mean = 5.33,
standard deviation [SD] = 1.99; mean = 6.31,
SD = 1.72, respectively; t
35 = ) 2.75, p < 0.05),
providing an additional check for our handling of
topic familiarity.
DISCUSSION
This study explored the inﬂuence of self-explanation
on medical students’ learning of knowledge required
to diagnose problems in familiar and less familiar
clinical areas. In line with our hypotheses, the
ﬁndings showed that generating self-explanations
while solving a clinical case led students to make
better diagnoses of problems related to the same
clinical topic than students who did not generate self-
explanations. This only occurred when students had
limited familiarity with the topic. When clinical
problems referred to the topic with which they were
already familiar, having previously engaged in self-
explanation in the course of solving problems did not
make any difference. The positive effect of
self-explanation in the diagnosis of more difﬁcult
problems was apparent after 1 week.
The resulting difference between students who
self-explained and those who did not is likely to
reﬂect cognitive processes put into action by
self-explanation.
13 When requested to generate
self-explanations, students more actively attempt to
make sense of the clinical ﬁndings in a case and try
to construct relationships between signs and
symptoms and to link them with causal
mechanisms. Students are compelled to process
information more deeply and thus it is likely that
elaboration on the new information, together with
the integration of new information into existing
knowledge structures and consequent knowledge
reconstruction, take place in a more extensive way.
These processes probably favoured the retention of
knowledge acquired during the problem-solving
phase and facilitated its retrieval when students
were asked to solve problems on a similar topic
1 week later.
A rich and well-organised knowledge base is central to
clinical reasoning; it evolves through stages during
medical training as illness scripts emerge as students
are exposed to patients.
1,2 Clinical experiences
certainly accelerate changes in students’ knowledge
structures, instigating a more rapid shift from causal
networks to illness scripts. 1,9 We may reasonably
assume that generating self-explanations during the
process of reasoning through and diagnosing clinical
cases facilitates the construction of more coherent
mental representations of the diseases, possibly
fostering the development of better organised and
richer illness scripts used for clinical reasoning. As
our ﬁndings suggest, this positive effect of
self-explanation is likely to be more substantial when
students are dealing with clinical problems in a
less familiar area, for which their illness scripts may
be less developed and therefore more subject to
major revision.
It is noteworthy that the beneﬁts of self-explanation
emerged in the absence of any feedback on the
contents of students’ remarks. Students’
self-generated explanations, produced after the
provision of minimal instructions, were certainly not
always entirely accurate and no correction was
provided. Even without feedback, simply by
elaborating more extensively on the cases, students
beneﬁted from self-explanation. This ﬁnding is
particularly relevant for clinical teaching. Indeed, the
study has potentially important implications for
clinical education. Self-explanation is an instructional
procedure that can be easily introduced and
implemented in many ways, even without requiring
the supervision of clinical teachers. It could be
used by students regularly in clinical rotations as a
way to reﬂect on less familiar problems in patient
encounters. Self-explanation could also be attempted
in small groups of peers and with written clinical
cases or various types of simulation as a complement
to exposure to real patients.
This study has limitations. We worked with students
in Year 3 of an undergraduate programme and it
ª Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2011. MEDICAL EDUCATION 2011; 45: 688–695 693
Inﬂuence of self-explanations on diagnostic performance
is not clear whether similar results would apply to
other groups of students or residents. Our sample
size was small and the study was conducted under
laboratory conditions, which restrict generalisations
to real learning environments such as busy
out-patient clinics. We cannot exclude the possibility
that students in the comparison group silently
generated explanations for themselves while solving
the cases. This, however, would only make the
ﬁndings stronger.
Longitudinal analysis of self-explanation processes
may shed further light on the mechanism by which
self-explanation in the training phase of our study
resulted in an effect a week later when no further
overt self-explaining was carried out. Other studies
might explore the effects of self-explanation at
various levels of medical training and in different
clinical topics, as well as the duration of the observed
effect. Further research should also explore whether
and how quantitative and qualitative differences in
self-generated explanations might have a positive
effect on learning, and whether self-explanation can
be used in a variety of formats of case presentation.
Furthermore, future studies should examine the
potential role of feedback or modelling by peers on
the effects of self-explanation.
Contributors:
MC contributed to the study conception and
design and to data interpretation, and drafted the
manuscript. CS-O contributed to the study conception and
design, and to data analysis and interpretation. JS and
LL contributed to the study conception and design and to
data interpretation. LB contributed to data acquisition,
analysis and interpretation. AB contributed to the study
conception and design, and to data acquisition and
interpretation. SM, HS and RR contributed to the study
conception and design, and to data interpretation. All
authors contributed to the critical revision of the paper and
approved the ﬁnal version.
Acknowledgements: none.
Funding: none.
Conﬂicts of interest: none.
Ethical approval: this study was approved by the Ethics and
Research Committee for Education and Social Sciences,
University of Sherbrooke.
REFERENCES
1 Schmidt HG, Rikers RMJP. How expertise develops in
medicine: knowledge encapsulation and illness script
formation. Med Educ 2007;41 (12):1133–9.
2 Norman G. Research in clinical reasoning: past history
and current trends. Med Educ 2005;39 (4):418–27.
3 Gruppen LD, Frohna AZ. Clinical reasoning. In:
Norman GR, van der Vleuten CPM, Newble DI, eds.
International Handbook of Research in Medical Education .
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers 2002;205–30.
4 Nendaz M, Charlin B, Leblanc V, Bordage G. Le
raisonnement clinique: donne´es issues de la recherche
et implications pour l’enseignement. Pe´dagogie Me´dicale
2005;6 (4):235–54.
5 Bordage G. Prototypes and semantic qualifiers: from
past to present. Med Educ 2007;41 (12):1117–21.
6 Charlin B, Boshuizen HP, Custers EJ, Feltovich PJ.
Scripts and clinical reasoning. Med Educ 2007;41
(12):1178–84.
7 Woods NN. Science is fundamental: the role of
biomedical knowledge in clinical reasoning. Med Educ
2007;41 (12):1173–7.
8 Eva KW. What every teacher needs to know about
clinical reasoning. Med Educ 2004;39 (1):98–106.
9 Schmidt HG, Norman GR, Boshuizen HPA. A cognitive
perspective on medical expertise: theory and implica-
tions. Acad Med 1990;65 (10):611–21.
10 Chi MTH, Bassock M. Learning from examples via self-
explanations. In: Resnick LB, ed. Knowing, Learning,
and Instruction: Essays in Honor of Robert Glaser. Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 1989;251–82.
11 Chi MTH, VanLehn KA. The content of physics self-
explanations. J Learn Sci 1991;11 (1):69–105.
12 Chi MTH, de Leeuw N, Chiu M, Lavancher C. Eliciting
self-explanations improves understanding. Cogn Sci
1994;18 (3):439–77.
13 Chi MTH. Self-explaining expository texts: the dual
processes of generating inferences and repairing
mental models. In: Glaser R, ed. Advances in
Instructional Psychology. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates 2000;161–238.
14 de Bruin ABH, Rikers RMJP, Schmidt HG. The
effect of self-explanation and prediction on the
development of principled understanding of chess in
novices. Contemp Educ Psychol 2007;32 (2):188–205.
Received 7 July 2010; editorial comments to authors 27 July 2010,
27 September 2010, 25 November 2010; accepted for publication
23 December 2010
694 ª Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2011. MEDICAL EDUCATION 2011; 45
: 688–695
M Chamberland et al
APPENDIX 1 TEMPLATE FOR CASE DEVELOPMENT
Speciﬁc diagnosis
Training phase Assessment phase
Less familiar topic (jaundice)
1 Acute viral hepatitis Hepatitis B Hepatitis A
2 Cirrhosis Chronic alcoholism Haemochromatosis
3 Obstructive jaundice Pancreatic tumour Choledocholithiasis
4 Haemolysis Auto-immune, idiopathic Cold agglutinins, Mycoplasma infection
More familiar topic (heart failure)
1 Coronary artery disease Acute myocardial infarction Chronic CAD, anaemia
2 Valvular disease Aortic stenosis Mitral insufﬁciency
3 Diastolic dysfunction Hypertensive cardiomyopathy Hypertensive cardiomyopathy, atrial fabrillation
4 Cardiomyopathy Toxic, alcoholic Viral myocarditis
Fillers (varied topics)
1 Acute gastrointestinal bleeding NSAIDs-associated ulcer Peptic ulcer
2 Fever, acute infection Pneumonia Acute prostatitis
3 Venous thrombosis Acute pulmonary embolism Paraneoplastic deep vein thrombosis
4 Acute renal failure Hypovolaemia Acute glomerulonephritis
CAD = coronary heart disease; NSAIDs = non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs
ª Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2011. MEDICAL EDUCATION 2011; 45: 688–695 695
Inﬂuence of self-explanations on diagnostic performance
Copyright of Medical Education is the property of Wiley-Blackwell and its content may not be copied or
emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.
However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.