TITLE: Teaching from the clinical reasoning literature: combined reasoning strategies help novice diagnosticians overcome misleading information
AUTHORS: Kevin W Eva, Rose M Hatala, Vicki R LeBlanc, Lee R Brooks
YEAR: 2007
DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2923.2007.02923.x

CONTENT:
Teaching from the clinical reasoning literature:
combined reasoning strategies help novice
diagnosticians overcome misleading information
KEVIN WE VA,1 ROSE MH ATALA,2 VICKI RL EBLANC3 &L EE RB ROOKS4
OBJECTIVE Previous research has revealed a peda-
gogical beneﬁt of instructing novice diagnosticians to
utilise a combined approach to clinical reasoning
(familiarity-driven pattern recognition combined
with a careful consideration of the presenting fea-
tures) when diagnosing electrocardiograms (ECGs).
This paper reports 2 studies demonstrating that the
combined instructions are especially valuable in
helping students overcome biasing inﬂuences.
METHODS Undergraduate psychology students were
trained to diagnose 10 cardiac conditions via ECG
presentation. Half of all participants were instructed
to reason in a combined manner and half were
given no explicit instruction regarding the diagnostic
task. In Study 1 ( n = 60), half of each group was
biased towards an incorrect diagnosis through pre-
sentation of counter-indicative features. In Study 2
(n = 48), a third of the test ECGs were presented with
a correct diagnostic suggestion, a third with an
incorrect suggestion, and a third without a suggestion.
RESULTS Overall, the instruction to utilise a com-
bined reasoning approach resulted in greater diag-
nostic accuracy relative to leaving students to their
own intuitions regarding how best to approach
new cases. The effect was particularly pronounced
when cases were made challenging by biasing
participants towards an incorrect diagnosis, either
through mention of a speciﬁc feature or by making
an inaccurate diagnostic suggestion.
DISCUSSION These studies advance a growing
body of evidence suggesting that various diagnostic
strategies identiﬁed in the literature on clinical
reasoning are not mutually exclusive and that
trainees can beneﬁt from explicit guidance regard-
ing the value of both analytic and non-analytic
reasoning tendencies.
KEYWORDS teaching ⁄ *methods; *clinical compe-
tence; education, medical, undergraduate ⁄ *methods;
psychology ⁄ *education; cardiology ⁄ *education;
*diagnosis.
Medical Education 2007: 41: 1152–1158
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2923.2007.02923.x
INTRODUCTION
Since the publication of Custers et al./C213s review 1 of
the clinical reasoning literature a decade ago, there
has been increasing recognition that, ﬁrstly, many of
the models of clinical reasoning present in the
medical education literature are not mutually
exclusive and, secondly, that there is value for the
diagnostician in not getting locked into any single
mode of thinking about clinical cases.
1,2 To a large
extent, the debate that has taken place in medical
education research is reﬂective of many broader
literatures aimed at understanding how humans
make decisions.
One approach to studying and ⁄ or understanding
judgement and decision making, commonly applied
in economics, is based upon a model of rationality,
clinical expertise
1Department of Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, McMaster
University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada
2Department of Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada
3Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada
4Department of Psychology, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario,
Canada
Correspondence: Kevin W Eva PhD, Department of Clinical Epidemiology
and Biostatistics, Program for Educational Research and Development,
MDCL 3522, McMaster University, 1200 Main Street West, Hamilton,
Ontario L8N 3Z5, Canada. Tel: 00 1 905 525 9140 (ext 27241);
Fax: 00 1 905 572 7099; E-mail: evakw@mcmaster.ca
/C211 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2007. MEDICAL EDUCATION 2007; 41: 1152–11581152
the notion being that the utility of a decision can be
derived from the product of the value gained from
each particular outcome and the probability with
which the outcome will occur. From this analytical
perspective, it is an irrational act to buy a lottery
ticket because, although the pay-out to the winner
may be very large, the probability of winning is so
small that the resultant utility (the product of the 2
values) is less than the cost of the ticket.
3 In
medicine, severity and probability often interact in
the same manner, so that low-probability diagnoses
are intentionally considered because the cost of
missing a serious diagnosis would be signiﬁcant.
From this perspective, bias is deﬁned as a consistent
deviation from rationality. Psychologists Amos Tver-
sky and Daniel Kahneman, among others, provided
great insight into human judgement by systematically
identifying and experimentally exploring biases that
are prevalent in our decision making, work which
resulted in Kahneman receiving the Nobel Prize in
Economics in 2002. One such bias they identiﬁed is
the /C212availability heuristic /C213, which refers to the ten-
dency we have to base judgements on vivid or salient
outcomes (i.e. those that are readily /C212available/C213to us
when imagining what might happen and which,
thereby, seem more probable) rather than on a more
rational, utility-driven approach.
4 To follow up on
the above example, many continue to buy lottery
tickets despite the low utility of such actions because
the vividness and excitement generated through
imagining what it would be like to win contributes to
an over-estimation of the likelihood that one might
win. Importantly, these sorts of mental short-cuts
often (if not always) inﬂuence our decisions without
our being aware that the heuristic is being used,
thus leading many to argue that we can improve
medical decision making (or decision making more
generally) and reduce diagnostic errors by educating
individuals about the ways in which their decision
making can be biased.
5,6 Alternative, but comple-
mentary, strategies for achieving the same goal in
medicine include teaching individuals to become
better Bayesians by explicitly directing their attention
to the need to learn (and consider) the probability
of any particular diagnosis (and how that probability
is conditional upon the presence or absence of
variable signs and symptoms)
7 or by provision of
explicit diagnostic algorithms as guidance for how
to complete a diagnostic search.
8
An alternative view of decision making derives from
the argument that these biases exist with such
prevalence and robustness because they are useful
and, therefore, not something we should ever hope
to abolish from our decision making. Gerd Gigeren-
zer, among others, has noted that many of these
heuristics and their associated biases are adaptive;
they may leave us susceptible to error in some cases,
but, given our complicated world, they help us more
than they hurt.
9 We might have the illusion that
the use of heuristics is suboptimal, but that is because
their use is noticeable only in cases where the
heuristic leads to inaccurate decisions relative to what
might be deemed optimal by rational standards. By
analogy, in medical diagnosis, the use of pattern
recognition is often noticed, and labelled as prob-
lematic, when it has led to an incorrect diagnosis
based on superﬁcial similarity. A more complete
consideration, however, requires one to acknowledge
that pattern recognition strategies not only often
yield the same decision as analytic decision-making
tendencies, but they sometimes result in better
outcomes.
10 When a classic case of pneumonia
presents in a doctor /C213s ofﬁce, the features that could
be carefully collected and converted into a diagnosis
of pneumonia will share a great deal of overlap
Overview
What is already known on this subject
When teaching electrocardiogram diagnosis
there is pedagogical benefit in encouraging
students to utilise analytic and non-analytic
reasoning strategies rather than treating either
class of strategies solely as a source of
detrimental bias.
What this study adds
Maintaining an optimal balance between non-
analytic and analytic reasoning strategies is
fragile for students. Giving them explicit
instructions to utilise a combined approach to
reasoning helps them to overcome the diffi-
culty provided by mention of a counter-indic-
ative feature or an incorrect diagnosis, both of
which are legitimate instructional techniques.
Suggestions for further research
Further research should examine these phe-
nomena within non-visual diagnostic domains
and across varying levels of training and
experience.
1153
/C211 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2007. MEDICAL EDUCATION 2007; 41: 1152–1158
with those of previously seen cases of pneumonia, so
assigning a diagnosis on either basis will yield the
same conclusion. Of real beneﬁt, however, is that the
concurrent reference to prior cases can overcome
some of the limitations of the traditionally recom-
mended careful, analytic inspection of features.
That is routinely considering the features in a very
careful, analytic manner may avoid the dangers of
premature closure, but it can also be detrimental.
Norman et al. have shown that prompting diagnosti-
cians to be particularly careful in their feature calls
can yield a list of features that is irreconcilable with
any particular diagnosis, possibly because considering
features individually rather than in context leads to
/C212overcalling/C213normal variants (i.e. leads to the diag-
nostician being misled by features that would not
have been distracting otherwise).
11 It is arguable
that, were that not the case, these sorts of non-
analytic decision-making tendencies would be much
more readily (and, in all likelihood, naturally)
extinguishable.
12
Taken together, these different views of our deci-
sion-making tendencies generate the impression
that balance between multiple decision-making ten-
dencies is necessary to enable a robust system that
will maximise diagnosticians /C213accuracy. In a recent
series of studies, we strived to test whether or not
there is pedagogical value in instructing novice
diagnosticians to avoid getting locked into any
single mode of reasoning. Absolute novices (under-
graduate psychology students) were given instruc-
tion in electrocardiogram (ECG) diagnosis. After a
training phase, we found that groups of participants
given advice to trust feelings of familiarity when
making their diagnoses but to also carefully consider
the features that are present on ECGs (i.e. those
who were instructed to use a /C212combined approach /C213
to clinical reasoning) revealed greater diagnostic
accuracy than groups of participants who were: (a)
given no advice regarding how to work through new
cases;
13 (b) were told to be analytic by adopting a
/C212feature-ﬁrst/C213approach to diagnosis in which all
features should be listed before generating a diag-
nosis; or (c) were told to be non-analytic by
instructing them simply to diagnose based on
familiarity-driven ﬁrst impressions of each new
ECG.
14 The combined instruction is not intended
(or expected) to have prompted a particular
reasoning process that could be used as a /C212how-to
guide/C213for diagnosticians, but, rather, was simply
aimed at helping trainees to beneﬁt from the
suggestion in the literature on clinical reasoning
that there are multiple mechanisms through which
one can accurately generate a diagnosis.
In the current paper we report on the ﬁndings from
a pair of additional studies aimed at testing the
robustness of this phenomenon. As alluded to
above, there are many ways that the diagnostic
process can go wrong. If he or she relies too
heavily on non-analytic processes (i.e. the feeling of
having seen it all before), the diagnostician may be
overly susceptible to missing key features that are
indicative of alternative diagnoses, but which do
not ﬁt the overall pattern of the case. If, by contrast,
the diagnostician relies too heavily on analytic
processes (i.e. being particularly systematic and
/C212objective/C213), his or her perception of the cohesive-
ness of the case may be undermined, thus resulting
in excessive weighting of unusual or distracting
features. One could easily expect that novices, who
have just learned a set of diagnostic rules, might be
especially vulnerable to this overly analytic ap-
proach. Here we report a pair of studies in which we
tried to make the case presentations particularly
difﬁcult by biasing participants /C213consideration of the
cases away from the correct diagnosis either through
mention of a feature consistent with an incorrect
diagnosis (Study 1) or through mention of a
plausible but incorrect diagnostic hypothesis (Study
2). These types of experimental manipulations are
consistent with the uncommon but important
sources of misinformation a clinician may obtain,
such as a referring doctor /C213s incorrect diagnosis or an
erroneous computer-generated list of ECG features.
In Study 1, the aim of the feature manipulation was
to induce people towards placing greater reliance
on their analytic tendencies (i.e. careful consider-
ation of the features presented in the case), whereas
the aim of the diagnostic hypothesis manipulation
in Study 2 was to induce people towards greater
reliance on their non-analytic tendencies (i.e.
greater inﬂuence of their Gestalt impressions).
Prior research by our group has shown the latter
manipulation to have a strong inﬂuence on the
diagnostic process.
15,16
METHODS
General methodology
Undergraduate psychology students were recruited
from McMaster University to ensure that participants
had no previous experience with ECG diagnosis.
They were given bonus credits in their introductory
psychology class for participation.
Both studies involved 3 phases (training, practice and
test) that took place in one-to-one teaching environ-
clinical expertise1154
/C211 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2007. MEDICAL EDUCATION 2007; 41: 1152–1158
ments with a research assistant. Only the experimen-
tal manipulation during the test phase varied between
the 2 studies. During the training phase, the
researcher taught participants the basics regarding
ECG diagnosis (i.e. the names of the 12 leads and the
labels assigned to a normal waveform). They were
then taught the key features of 10 diagnostic
categories through presentation of a written feature
list and a series of examples. The diagnostic categories
were:
1 normal;
2 right ventricular hypertrophy;
3 left ventricular hypertrophy with strain;
4 left bundle branch block;
5 right bundle branch block;
6 acute anterior myocardial infarction;
7 acute inferior myocardial infarction;
8 ischaemia;
9 pericarditis, and
10 hyperkalaemia.
Within each category 4 examples were presented.
During presentation of the ﬁrst 2 examples, the
researcher pointed to and described the features that
made that particular ECG a member of the category.
During the presentation of the second 2 examples,
the participant was asked to do the same. This phase
of the experiment required 45–60 minutes to
complete per participant.
After studying all 10 categories in this way,
participants entered a practice phase during which
they were presented with a booklet of 10 ECGs,
all of which had been seen during training, but
which were randomly sorted without diagnostic
labels. At the start of the practice phase, partici-
pants were randomly assigned to either a /C212com-
bined instruction /C213group or a /C212no instruction /C213
group. Those in the combined instruction group
were encouraged to use a combination of analytic
and non-analytic reasoning strategies when con-
fronted with each new ECG through the following
instructions:
/C212New ECGs often look like ECGs that have been
seen before (i.e. during training). Trust this sense
of familiarity, but realise that basing decisions
solely on similarity can lead to diagnostic errors.
So, don/C213t ‘‘jump the gun’’. Consider the feature list
before providing a ﬁnal diagnosis. /C213
The other half of the participants were not given
instructions that would promote any particular
reasoning process. Instead, they were told:
/C212Assign a diagnosis to each ECG using whatever
strategy comes naturally to you. Feel free to use the
feature list, but approach each case using whatever
strategy seems most appropriate to help you
reach the correct diagnosis. /C213
All participants in both groups were allowed to view
the ECG, the feature list and the generic waveform
image from the training materials when assigning
their diagnosis. They were given feedback after
interpreting each ECG, consisting of the correct
diagnosis and an indication of which features
determined the correct diagnosis.
Finally, during the test phase, participants were
presented with an additional booklet of ECGs. All
participants were provided with the same instructions
and feature list as during the practice phase, but no
feedback was given regarding the accuracy of
performance during the test. The biasing interven-
tions were implemented during the test phase. No
time limits were imposed, but all participants
completed the entire study in 90–120 minutes.
Study-speciﬁc methodology
During the test phase of Study 1, participants were
presented with 1 of 2 possible test booklets, each
consisting of the same 16 ECGs. In 1 booklet the
ECGs were presented along with a distracting feature.
With each presentation, participants were asked to
consider (before trying to diagnose the ECG)
whether or not the feature named was present on the
recording. Participants were unaware that the feature
presented was indicative of an incorrect diagnosis
in all cases. However, in all cases it was somewhat
unclear whether or not the feature was actually
present. The other half of the participants were
shown the same set of 16 ECGs without an interfering
feature included. They were simply asked to provide a
diagnosis for each ECG using the instructions they
had been given in the practice phase of the study. In
other words, both instruction and bias were crossed,
between-subject, manipulations. The number of
correct diagnoses (out of 16) was calculated for each
participant and a 2-way
ANOVA was performed on this
accuracy variable with instruction and bias as
between-subject variables. Posthoc t-tests were used to
resolve the source of a signiﬁcant interaction.
The test phase of Study 2 was similar to that of Study
1 in that the biasing manipulation was implemented
during the test. In Study 2, however, the bias
condition was incorporated as a within-subjects
manipulation such that each participant was
1155
/C211 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2007. MEDICAL EDUCATION 2007; 41: 1152–1158
presented with ECGs in each bias condition. Three
test booklets were used, each containing the same 18
ECGs, but differing in the information presented
along with the recording. Six of the ECGs were
presented with no additional information, 6 were
presented with the correct diagnosis, and 6 were
presented with an incorrect diagnosis. To avoid the
inﬂuence of prestige as much as possible, participants
were told that the diagnostic suggestion had been
raised by another psychology student at an equal level
of training. For example, 1 ECG was presented with
the statement: /C212This ECG was shown to a group of
psychology students and 1 of the diagnoses raised
was ischaemia. /C213Participants were then asked to
diagnose the ECG using the instructions they had
been given in the practice phase of the study. Adding
2 ECGs to the set used in Study 1 enabled us to
add a third bias condition while ensuring that each
ECG was presented equally often in each bias
condition by counter-balancing across participants.
The number of correct diagnoses (out of 6) within
each bias condition was calculated for each partici-
pant and a mixed design
ANOVA using instruction
(combined versus none) as a between-subjects factor,
and bias condition as a within-subjects factor was
performed on this accuracy variable. We also used
t-tests as planned comparisons, given that we did not
expect a difference across instruction within the
bias-correct condition.
RESULTS
Study 1
Sixty students participated in this experiment; 30
received combined instructions and 30 received no
reasoning instructions. Fifteen from each group
were given ECGs with an interfering feature and 15
were not.
ANOVA revealed a main effect of instruc-
tion; the group provided with the combined
reasoning instruction outperformed those given no
instruction on how to diagnose new ECGs
(F[1,56] = 9.06, P < 0.01). The main effect of bias
did not reach signiﬁcance, but was in the expected
direction ( F[1,56] = 1.87, P < 0.2). The interaction
between instruction and bias indicated that the
impact of a negatively biasing feature presentation
was greater in the no-instruction condition (effect
size = 1.02) than in the combined reasoning con-
dition (effect size = 0.32) ( F[1,56] = 3.7, P < 0.07).
t-tests further indicated that the accuracy rates
achieved when a biasing feature was presented were
lower than when no biasing feature was presented
in the no-instruction condition ( P < 0.06), but
that the accuracy rates did not differ in the
combined reasoning condition ( P > 0.6). The
mean scores for each condition are illustrated in
Table 1. All groups performed markedly better than
chance, which would result in a score of 1.6 ⁄ 16
given that there were 10 possible response
categories.
Study 2
A total of 48 students participated in this experi-
ment; 24 received combined instructions and 24
received no reasoning instructions. All participants
were presented with 6 ECGs in each of the bias
conditions (correct diagnosis, incorrect diagnosis,
no bias).
ANOVA revealed that none of the main
effects of instruction, bias or the bias · instruction
interactions were statistically signiﬁcant. Planned
comparisons revealed, however, that the key com-
parison (combined versus no-instruction within the
bias-incorrect condition) revealed a statistically
signiﬁcant difference ( F[1,46] = 4.2, P < 0.05).
Similarly, although the group given combined
instructions did not reveal a statistically signiﬁcant
effect of bias ( F[2,46] = 1.4, P > 0.25), there was
a signiﬁcant difference between the bias-incorrect
condition and the bias-correct condition in the
no-instruction group ( F[1,46] = 4.3, P < 0.05). The
mean scores for each condition are illustrated in
Table 2. Again, all groups performed markedly
better than chance, which would result in a score
of 0.6 ⁄ 6 given that there were 10 possible response
categories.
clinical expertise
Table 1 Mean diagnostic accuracy (out of 16) and standard error as a function of reasoning instruction and presence or absence of a biasing feature pres entation
Interfering feature No interference Average P Effect size
Combined reasoning instructions 8.13 (0.45) 7.80 (0.55) 7.97 > 0.6 0.17
No reasoning instructions 5.13 (0.83) 7.13 (0.54) 6.13 < 0.06 0.70
Average 6.63 7.47 7.05 < 0.2
P < 0.01 > 0.3 < 0.01
Effect size 1.02 0.32
1156
/C211 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2007. MEDICAL EDUCATION 2007; 41: 1152–1158
DISCUSSION
This pair of studies provides further empirical
support for the notion that explicitly telling novice
diagnosticians to utilise multiple forms of reasoning
(in this case, familiarity-driven pattern recognition
combined with careful consideration of the present-
ing features) can result in improved diagnostic
accuracy. Despite the intuitive nature of statements
such as /C212no single tool will be right for every job /C213,a
series of studies, including these, has now been
conducted that suggest students do not spontane-
ously adopt this approach to clinical reasoning as
effectively as they might.
11,13,14 In other words, there
appears to be pedagogical beneﬁt in explicitly guid-
ing students to reason in a way that probably sounds
as if it should occur naturally. Although nobody can
control (or even say with certainty) what reasoning
processes are operational when a diagnostician works
through a case, there is every reason to believe that
participants in the no-instruction condition would
have been inﬂuenced by similarity when making their
diagnostic decisions
13,17 and it is inconceivable that
they would not have utilised the feature list to help
scan each ECG for features. However, participants in
that group did not perform as successfully as partic-
ipants who had been explicitly told to trust feelings of
familiarity and to be careful not to overlook pre-
senting features.
Unique to this study are ﬁndings that suggest just
how frail this balance between analytic and non-
analytic reasoning strategies can be and that instruc-
tion to adopt a combined reasoning approach can
help maintain this balance when faced with chal-
lenging cases. Biasing participants either towards
excessive reliance on feature-level information (as
might occur if one were overly analytic) or towards
excessive reliance on diagnosis-level information (as
might occur if one were overly non-analytic) had the
impact of reducing diagnostic accuracy differentially
across groups of participants. In both studies, those
randomly assigned to receive a combined reasoning
instruction showed no decline in performance when
they were intentionally misled by the researcher
towards an incorrect response, by contrast with those
who were not given any instruction about how to
reason through these stimuli. Study 2 is the ﬁrst study
in 6 not to have shown an overall main effect of
combined reasoning instructions compared with
other reasoning instructions,
11,13,14 a fact that leads
us to suspect that performance in the no-bias
condition for this group was simply anomalously
(and erroneously) low.
Limitations of this programme of research include
the fact that it is intentionally focused narrowly on
knowledge-based components of the diagnostic pro-
cess in an aim to better understand how knowledge is
organised in memory and how it can best be utilised
in practice. We intentionally use visual materials
(ECGs) in order to study the balance between
analytic and non-analytic processing. There are
certainly other aspects of practice that deﬁne com-
petence for doctors, including the related, but
under-studied, aspect of making treatment decisions,
and broader tendencies that are usually described
as being non-cognitive (e.g. communication skills or
the inclination towards re-investing one /C213s extra
mental resources into continuing professional or
personal development).
18 In addition, it remains to
be seen whether or not the effects reported in this
paper will generalise to other medical training
contexts with actual medical trainees. Absolute nov-
ices were selected for this research to ensure naı ¨vete´
with respect to ECG diagnosis, thus maximising the
control we had over prior relevant experiences and
minimising the mental database of previously seen
ECGs on which participants could draw. Whether or
not these strategies yield similar (and longterm)
Table 2 Mean diagnostic accuracy (out of 6) and standard error as a function of reasoning instruction and presence or absence of a biasing diagnostic su ggestion
Incorrect diagnosis
presented
No diagnosis
presented
Correct diagnosis
presented Average P
Combined reasoning instructions 3.58 (0.25) 3.08 (0.28) 3.67 (0.27) 3.44 NS
No reasoning instructions 2.83 (0.27) 3.21 (0.32) 3.50 (0.24) 3.18 Incorrect < correct
(P < 0.05)
Average 3.21 3.15 3.58 3.31 > 0.15
P < 0.05 > 0.75 > 0.65 > 0.3
Effect size 0.59 0.09 0.13
NS = not signiﬁcant
1157
/C211 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2007. MEDICAL EDUCATION 2007; 41: 1152–1158
beneﬁts for medical students at intermediate or
senior levels of training or practice, the current
ﬁndings should be construed as providing beneﬁt in
that they can help to set learning off on the right
foot, at least in visual domains such as those provided
by ECG diagnosis.
As we mentioned earlier, we stress that we do not
interpret these ﬁndings to mean that we have
discovered the process through which to maximise
diagnostic success. On the contrary, among the
principles guiding this work is the notion that
diagnostic ability is somewhat amorphous and ﬂexi-
ble.
2 Better diagnosticians are likely to be those who
can overcome case-speciﬁc weaknesses through the
recruitment of additional diagnostic strategies
(either consciously or unconsciously) as it is unlikely
that any single diagnostic pathway will be capable
of resolving every patient presentation a doctor is
likely to encounter. Better diagnosticians may also be
those who are less likely to be satisﬁed (again, either
consciously or unconsciously) with diagnoses that
are derived from a single diagnostic pathway because
these ﬁndings and the work that precedes them
suggest that increased reliance on any single diag-
nostic strategy is likely to harm performance. Further
work is required, however, to tease apart the rela-
tionships between these phenomena and ability. For
now, we treat these ﬁndings as simply indicative of
the value that can be derived from providing explicit
guidance regarding appropriate ways to solve diag-
nostic problems without limiting that guidance to any
single particular strategy.
Contributors:
KWE and LRB conceived and designed
Study 1. All 4 authors conceived and designed Study 2. LRB
oversaw data collection for Study 1. KWE oversaw data
collection for Study 2. KWE performed all data analyses and
drafted the paper. RMH, VRL and LRB then made critical
revisions. All authors approved the ﬁnal manuscript.
Acknowledgements: the authors would like to thank
Tavinder Ark, Lindsay Cameron, Samantha Johnson and
Jessie McCready for their assistance with data collection.
Funding: none.
Conﬂicts of interest: none.
Ethical approval: this study was approved by the
Hamilton Health Sciences Research Ethics Board.
REFERENCES
1 Custers EJFM, Regehr G, Norman GR. Mental repre-
sentations of medical diagnostic knowledge: a review.
Acad Med 1996;71:24–6.
2 Eva KW. What every teacher needs to know about
clinical reasoning. Med Educ 2005;39:98–106.
3 Rosenthal J. Struck by Lightning: the Curious World of
Probabilities. Toronto: HarperCollins 2005.
4 Tversky A, Kahneman D. Judgement under uncer-
tainty: heuristics and biases. Science 1974;185:1124–31.
5 Klein JG. Five pitfalls in decisions about diagnosis and
prescribing. BMJ 2005;330:781–4.
6 Croskerry P. The importance of cognitive errors in
diagnosis and strategies to minimise them. Acad Med
2003;78:775–80.
7 Elieson SW, Papa FJ. The effects of various knowledge
formats on diagnostic performance. Acad Med 1994;69
(Suppl):81–3.
8 Mandin H, Jones A, Woloschuk W, Harasym P. Helping
students learn to think like experts when solving
clinical problems. Acad Med 1997;72:173–9.
9 Gigerenzer G, Todd P, ABC Research Group. Simple
Heuristics that make us Smart . New York: Oxford
University Press 1999.
10 Gladwell M. Blink: the Power of Thinking without Thinking.
New York: Little Brown & Co. 2005.
11 Norman GR, Brooks LR, Colle CL, Hatala RM. The
benefit of diagnostic hypotheses in clinical reasoning:
experimental study of an instructional intervention for
forward and backward reasoning. Cognit Instr
2000;17:433–48.
12 Eva KW, Norman GR. Heuristics and biases – a biased
perspective on clinical reasoning. Med Educ
2005;39:870–2.
13 Ark TK, Brooks LR, Eva KW. The benefits of flexibility:
the pedagogical value of instructions to adopt multi-
faceted diagnostic reasoning strategies. Med Educ
2007;41:281–7.
14 Ark TK, Brooks LR, Eva KW. Giving learners the best of
both worlds: do clinical teachers need to guard against
teaching pattern recognition to novices? Acad Med
2006;81:405–9.
15 Hatala R, Norman GR, Brooks LR. Impact of a
clinical scenario on accuracy of electrocardiogram
interpretation. J Gen Intern Med 1999;14:126–9.
16 LeBlanc VR, Brooks LR, Norman GR. Believing is
seeing: the influence of a diagnostic hypothesis on the
interpretation of clinical features. Acad Med 2002;77
(Suppl):67–9.
17 Norman GR, Brooks LR. The non-analytical basis of
clinical reasoning. Adv Health Sci Educ 1997;2:173–84.
18 Mylopolous M, Regehr G. Cognitive metaphors of
expertise and knowledge: prospects and limitations for
medical education. Med Educ 2007;41:1159–65.
Received 1 May 2007; editorial comments to authors
1 August 2007; accepted for publication 9 September 2007
clinical expertise
/C211 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2007. MEDICAL EDUCATION 2007; 41: 1152–1158
1158