TITLE: Preparing medical students for clinical decision making: A pilot study exploring how students make decisions and the perceived impact of a clinical decision making teaching intervention
AUTHORS: Calum A. McGregor, Catherine Paton, Calum Thomson, Madawa Chandratilake, Hazel Scott
YEAR: 2012
DOI: 10.3109/0142159x.2012.670323

CONTENT:
2012; 34: e508–e517
WEB PAPER
Preparing medical students for clinical decision
making: A pilot study exploring how students
make decisions and the perceived impact of a
clinical decision making teaching intervention
CALUM A. MCGREGOR, CATHERINE PATON, CALUM THOMSON, MADAWA CHANDRATILAKE &
HAZEL SCOTT
NHS Lanarkshire Medical Education Training Centre, UK
Abstract
Background: Junior doctors are frequently faced with making difficult clinical decisions and previous studies have shown that
they are unprepared for some aspects of clinical decision making.
Aim: To explore medical students’ feelings and strategies when responsible for making clinical decisions and to obtain students’
views of the effectiveness of a clinical decision making teaching intervention.
Methods: A teaching intervention was developed, consisting of a clinical decision making tool, a tutorial and scenarios within a
simulated ward environment. A total of 23 volunteer students participated in individual interviews immediately after their simulator
sessions. The qualitative data from the interviews were analysed to identify emerging themes.
Results: Despite extended shadowing programmes, students feel unprepared for clinical decision making as FY1s, and lack
effective decision making strategies. Experiencing complex decision making scenarios through individually orientated simulation
results in students being subjectively more prepared for work as FY1s.
Conclusion: Students continue to feel unprepared for the responsibility of clinical decision making. A teaching intervention,
including simulated individual clinical scenarios, later in undergraduate training, appeared to be useful in improving medical
students’ decision making, specifically in relation to making a diagnosis, prioritising, asking for help and multi-tasking, but further
work is required.
Introduction
Clinical decision making, or clinical reasoning, has been
described as being a foundation of effective clinical education
(Dent & Harden 2009) and is a significant aspect of physician
competence (Norman 2005). Examining how clinicians make
decisions can be difficult (Eva 2005), but a large clinical
decision making literature base does exist. According to the
literature, diagnostic errors are a significant problem (Berner &
Graber 2008), and despite rapid advances in medical science,
the detection of incorrect diagnoses at autopsy has not
changed over the past 100 years (Lundberg 1998).
Graber (2005) found that cognitive errors were the most
common causes of diagnostic errors, and descriptions of how
these cognitive errors can occur have been previously outlined
(Croskerry 2003; Graber 2005; Croskerry 2009).
Interestingly, the vast majority of the literature on teaching
clinical decision making has focused on making a correct
diagnosis. While this is certainly a very important aspect, there
are other aspects to clinical decision making (Lake 2005).
These include clinical prioritisation and recognising limitations
and asking for help. A literature search revealed no real
information on how medical graduates prioritise. The previous
literature on requesting senior assistance found it to be
complex, with one study concluding that it was too complex
to teach (Stewart 2008).
This is particularly relevant to final year medical students,
as previous studies have shown that they are unprepared for
prioritising (Tallentire et al. 2011), and asking for help (Illing
et al. 2008). Nevertheless, GMC (2009) guidelines expect that
medical educators will include these components in under-
graduate curricula, and that medical graduates are competent
Practice points
. Current FY1 shadowing programmes do not fully
prepare undergraduates for decision making in a clinical
environment.
. Prioritisation teaching interventions are required.
. Perplexity faced by junior doctors in making clinical
decisions could possibly be minimised by providing
structured cognitive frameworks.
. Simulated individual multi-tasking experiences have the
potential to make students more prepared for work.
. Such interventions are welcomed by students.
Correspondence: C.A. McGregor, NHS Lanarkshire Medical Education and Training Centre, Kirklands Hospital, Fallside Road, Bothwell, UK.
G71 8BB. Tel: 01698 855528; fax: 0141 2111801; email: calum.mcgregor@nhs.net
e508 ISSN 0142–159X print/ISSN 1466–187X online/12/070508–10 /C2232012 Informa UK Ltd.
DOI: 10.3109/0142159X.2012.670323
in making diagnoses, prioritising and knowing when to
seek help.
Various strategies have been introduced to improve clinical
decision making (Croskerry 2003), based on dual process
theory and cognitive biases. These include encouraging
metacognition (Croskerry 2003), cognitive autopsies
(Croskerry 2005; Sullivan 2009), encouraging an analytical
approach through de-biasing strategies (Croskerry 2003), and
encouraging both an analytical and non-analytical approach
(Norman 2009; Norman & Eva 2010). However, while these
approaches have shown benefits in performing a single task
(Eva et al. 2007); the impact of such strategies in a clinical
setting that requires multiple and interconnected decisions to
be made is uncertain.
To develop students’ skills in making decisions in relation
to making diagnosis, prioritisation and asking for help, a
tripartite teaching intervention was developed. Analytical, non-
analytical and combined approaches to decision making were
incorporated in the intervention.
Component 1
Using a structured approach has previously been shown to be
helpful in a number of areas relevant to clinical decision
making, e.g. the airway, breathing, circulation, disability,
exposure (ABCDE) approach to clinical examination (Jevon
2010), the situation-background-assessment-recommendation
(SBAR) approach to communication and handover
(Featherstone 2005) and the COVER ABCD – A SWIFT
CHECK for anaesthetic emergencies (Runciman et al. 2005).
Therefore, a decision making tool (AM I HERO NOW) was
introduced to students, to be used when faced with making a
decision (Figure 1). The tool was designed to be a memorable
mnemonic, incorporating multiple aspects of clinical decision
making, with the aim of prompting students to avoid certain
recognised cognitive dispositions to respond, such as prema-
ture closure (Croskerry 2003).
Component 2
A tutorial session was introduced providing a theoretical
understanding of the process of clinical decision making. The
tutorial covered cognitive theory (dual process theory and
cognitive and affective biases), prioritisation and when to ask
for help, and included interactive cases scenarios.
Component 3
As a part of this intervention, students were introduced to a
simulated ward environment, where they dealt with three
scenarios addressing: making a diagnosis, specifically over-
coming the suggestion of an incorrect diagnosis, which is
known to be a legitimate instructional technique (Eva et al.
2007); prioritisation; and recognising limitations and asking for
help.
This article illustrates how medical students make decisions
and examines the effectiveness of this tripartite teaching
intervention in its pilot run.
AM I
Am I trained to make this 
decision?
Am I in possession of the 
knowledge, skills and 
competencies required?
Am I adversely affected by 
the patient (e.g. alcohol, 
smell etc.) or circumstances 
(time, stress, sleep 
deprivation, other clinicians 
involved)?
Am I the person who should 
be responsible for this 
decision?
HERO
Have I enough information to be 
making this diagnosis/decision?
History
Examination 
Results 
Other possible causes; other 
possible options? – could it be 
something else, could we do 
something else?
NOW?
Is there anything happening now that is 
impacting on this decision? 
Have I considered the impact of this 
diagnosis / decision on:
Number one patient -
Is ITU appropriate? Is NFR/ 
advance directive in place? Will 
they be upset, have they sufficient 
support, will I need to arrange 
follow-up?
Others -
Family is there someone else who 
should be involved? 
Staff – is someone identified to 
undertake it; have they the 
necessary knowledge, skill and 
time
Which is the priority action – how will 
this decision affect the treatment given to 
other patients?
Figure 1. ‘AM I HERO NOW’ tool.
Preparing students for decision making
e509
Methodology
This study, which was considered as an educational project,
was granted an ethics waiver by the NHS Research Ethics
Service.
Study approach
This was a qualitative study exploring clinical decision making
and students’ views of the effectiveness of a teaching interven-
tion using data obtained from interviewing medical students.
Study population and sampling
The sample was drawn from the population of 36 final year
medical students undertaking a 6-week ‘Preparation for
Practice’ block in the Lanarkshire region. The prospective
participants had all completed their final university examina-
tions, and this was their last undergraduate placement before
they graduated and started working as junior doctors.
All 36 students were e-mailed by the researcher to explain
the clinical decision making teaching programme, and to ask
for volunteers to participate in interviews which would take
place immediately after their simulated ward session. For those
who agreed, formal written consent was obtained on the day
of their simulator session, prior to the event. The consent also
included permission to digitally record the interviews, and the
volunteers were assured of confidentiality and anonymity of
the data.
The final sample consisted of 23 volunteer students (64% of
the original population of 36); 12 males and 11 females.
The students were randomly allocated into three groups –
one group received no decision making teaching prior to the
simulation session, one group were given the clinical decision
making tool prior to the simulation session and one group
were given both the tool and the tutorial prior to the simulation
session (Figure 2).
Data collection
Data were collected using real time observation of student
performance and semi-structured interviews.
During the simulator, each student was followed and
observed by a senior doctor. The observer completed three
objective structured clinical examination style checklists
(Appendix) consisting of 20 points relating to the student’s
performance in each of the three decision making scenarios
outlined above.
The observers consisted of senior medical staff – three
clinical teaching fellows and two staff grade doctors with an
interest in medical education.
Within 30 min of completing their simulator session, each
student was interviewed by the researcher (Calum McGregor).
The interviews started off with open-ended questions about
how the students experienced the simulation, which were
followed by specific questions on the following areas:
. Students’ thoughts on the tool and tutorial.
. Students’ thoughts on existing tools (SBAR and ABCDE).
. Students’ thoughts on the simulator session.
. What did students do when faced with decisions to make in
the three scenarios outlined above – i.e. making a diagnosis,
prioritising and deciding when to call for help? Why did
they do that? How did they feel?
. What strategies did students use for decision making in the
scenarios?
. What decision making training had they had prior to this
event?
The researcher received each student’s checklists prior to their
interview, thus enabling the researcher to see what courses of
action the student had taken in each scenario, and therefore
direct questions accordingly during the interviews.
The interviews lasted from 14 to 50 min. All interviews were
digitally recorded, transcribed and given a unique coding
number.
Data analysis
Qualitative data analysis was conducted manually using a
constant comparison approach. Each transcript was read
sentence by sentence, and reread by an independent
researcher, to identify areas of meaning. These sections of
meaning were coded and compared with codes in other
transcripts.
Results
How do medical students feel, and what strategies do they use,
when making clinical decisions with regards to diagnosis,
prioritisation and asking for help?
Figure 2. Participant Groups.
C. A. McGregor et al.
e510
Diagnosis
When faced with diagnosing unwell patients, most students
used the ABCDE approach for the initial assessment. The
students were familiar with this approach, having been taught
it repeatedly during their time in medical school.
SC1 – ABCDE is really good. I think it’s good if you have
no idea what is going on, it gives you something to start off
with
SB6 – I started my systematic approach so like that kind of
gave me time to think about things, by going through ABC.
SB5 – ABCDE gives you something useful to do as soon as you
get there.
Having a structured approach was re-assuring for students,
and helped to alleviate their concerns that they would miss
something important.
SA2 – It’s reassuring cause it kind of covers your back, almost
like a proforma you go through and if you do everything you
are not going to miss anything
Once students had completed their ABCDE assessments,
many of them struggled with what to do next, particularly if
they had not made a diagnosis by this point. There was a
contrast between their slick, structured ABCDE assessment and
what followed after it.
SA2 – I didn’t know what to do after the ABCD. Everything
kind of goes out your head
Students were comfortable taking histories and performing
ABCDE assessments. However, when faced with a confused
patient who was unable to provide a history, students
struggled to know how to obtain useful information, and
struggled to produce a differential diagnosis.
SA2 – I was just kind of oh no what do I do? In terms of
producing a differential I am not used to doing that at all
really
Prioritisation
Having to make decisions on how to prioritise was completely
new to the students, and they had not received previous
training on prioritisation. Importantly, the students recognised
that the simulator exercise was the first time that they had been
asked to make these types of decisions.
SC2 – I’ve never really been left to make decisions and
prioritise things.
SC2 – I am glad I had a chance to be exposed to that before I
am put in the real situation. It’s something I had never really
done.
Some indicated frustration that despite having completing
their medical training, they had never had this opportunity
before.
SA2 – When you are a medical student you are kind of
cocooned, wrapped up in cotton wool
During their simulation session, the students were faced
with multiple tasks and acutely unwell patients, and therefore
had to prioritise. Students found this stressful.
SA3 – It was stressful. When you have a sick patient and then
the page goes off, that was stressful.
When given patients to prioritise between, some students
struggled to know what to ask over the phone, and lacked
strategies for prioritising effectively.
SE3 – I didn’t ask for any details over the phone.
SA4 – I didn’t get a sense of how unwell he was.
In addition, as some students did not ask for information
over the phone, they were making judgements on prioritising
patients based on very limited amounts of information.
SE3 – I don’t think I asked for any info over the phone, I maybe
should have asked for a bit more.
Some strategies used for prioritising by the students were
subjective or inadequate. Examples of inadequate prioritisa-
tion strategies included avoiding patients where students were
unsure of the diagnosis, and attending requests to see patients
in a strict chronological order rather than based on clinical
need.
SD2 – I saw them first because I kind of knew what to do with
them.
SC1 – I saw whoever paged me first.
The students’ difficulties in prioritising were exacerbated by
the fact that they had never been paged before, and were
unfamiliar with pagers.
SE1 – I thought I could ignore the pager if I was doing
something else, I’m sure they will page someone else.
Recognising limitations and asking for help
Students were good at recognising their limitations when they
encountered something that they could not do, and when they
did not know what to do next, and were not afraid to ask for
help in those situations.
SC1 – I asked my senior because I felt that I had done
everything in my power. I was starting to feel out of my depth.
However, the students did not ask for help when they had
two acutely unwell patients to see at the same time, or when
they had multiple tasks to do. This problem was exacerbated
by students being unfamiliar with the roles of other members
of the on-call team.
SA5 – I never really thought that this would be an excellent
point to ask for help. I didn’t know the role of a senior – I
thought they were just there in case things really took a turn
for the worst.
During the simulator session, the SBAR tool was written
down next to the phones. Making it readily available increased
Preparing students for decision making
e511
the use of SBAR. The students felt more comfortable using the
structured, SBAR approach when it came to actually speaking
to their senior on the phone.
SB2 – The SBAR structure was really useful. It took a bit of the
fear away definitely
SC6 – I didn’t use SBAR first time round, I just made a
panicked phone-call, but 2nd time round SBAR was on the
wall beside the phone so I just thought I will go through that
and it worked.
When students did not use the SBAR tool, some ran into
problems and started feeling stressed.
SE6 – I wish I had used SBAR. I felt a bit flustered without it.
I sort of forgot.
Did the clinical decision making teaching intervention
(decision making tool, tutorial and simulator session) have any
effect on students’ clinical decision making?
Decision making tool
Despite being unsure of what to do after completing their
ABCDE assessment, the students did not use the ‘AM I
HERO NOW’ decision making tool. There were three main
reasons why the students did not use it; they felt it would take
too long to use, it was too complex and they were unfamiliar
with it.
SC1 – You don’t have time to sit there and think about every
single question on that piece of paper.
SD3 – I thought there was a lot of information on it. Maybe a
bit too much.
SB5 – I had never used it before. When I went in, the aide
memoire went out the window.
Despite not using it in the simulated ward session, students
appreciated that using a tool such as ‘AM I HERO NOW’ for
decision making could be useful. They liked the idea of having
a structure to use when faced with a difficult decision, in the
same way that they used ABCDE for assessment and SBAR for
referrals to their seniors. The experience of not using a
decision making tool appeared to increase its perceived value
to the students.
SD1 – Having come out actually I would have done the HERO
bit especially, I think it would have been good. I think it would
have been pretty useful.
Tutorial
The interviews revealed that the tutorial group were
able to identify some of the concepts from the tutorial within
the simulator session, but there was no discernable difference
in the way they described their approaches to decision
making.
SD4 – The tutorial was useful. It was stuff I’d never heard
of, and the ways you are influenced into decisions with
stuff I had never heard of, but having it pointed out to
you is probably a good thing even if you don’t take much
else from it. Just someone saying be aware of it is quite
useful.
SE2 – I thought it was useful, I thought it was quite interesting.
I suppose the nurse saying the patient is having a stroke would
be one of the things from the tutorial.
However, some students did not see the relevance of being
taught clinical decision making theory such as dual process
theory and cognitive dispositions to respond.
SE4 – I remember the type 1 and type 2 stuff. I got it, I
understood it but I don’t think I found it relevant to me.
SE5 – The clinical based stuff you were talking about was
good, but the sort of theory behind it, I don’t know if it would
benefit me that much.
Simulator session
The students found the simulator session more useful than the
tutorial and the decision making tool.
SE2 – You get more out of doing the practical stuff. I
don’t think there is a substitute for doing that. There is a
difference between knowing what to do and actually putting it
into practice.
Evidence of learning
It was evident from the interviews that the students had
learned from the mistakes they had made during the simulator
session across the domains of diagnosis, prioritisation and
when to ask for help.
Diagnosis
The simulation session helped students to understand the
importance of making sure that they have enough information
to arrive at a diagnosis, and to consider other possibilities.
SE5 – The nurse said she thought the patient had had a stroke
so I just took that as being gospel. I think today highlighted the
need for taking a more open approach.
Prioritisation
During the interviews students were able to identify weak-
nesses in the prioritisation strategies they used in the simulator
session.
SD3 – I should probably gather more information before I
decide who needs to be seen. I didn’t ask for observations or
anything which I should have
Students indicated that they had learned how to prioritise
more objectively.
SA1 – I’d want to know their routine observations over the
phone.
C. A. McGregor et al.
e512
Recognising limitations and asking for help
After the simulator session, the students had a better under-
standing of when to ask for help.
SA3 – I should have phoned someone else to come and help me
instead of finishing with what I was dealing with and then
going to the other one.
The students felt more prepared for work after the
simulator session.
SE6 – Today put you in the role as the FY1 rather than just
shadowing an FY1. You are actually making the decisions on
the run, rather than asking someone else to make the decisions
for you. It’s good to do it in a simulated environment before
you do it for real.
Other findings
Students’ behaviours suggested that they are unprepared for
complex decision making.
There were a number of areas where students found
difficulty with decision making, especially in making decisions
alone regarding diagnosis, prioritisation and asking for help,
and in making simultaneous decisions.
Simultaneous decision making (multi-tasking)
During the simulator session, many students did not write
down the tasks they were asked to do. They had not
considered that they might not remember them all, and
therefore they forgot about a number of the tasks.
SC6 – The phone went and she was still asking me what I
thought and I was like, ‘one of you give me a break for a
minute while I try to think clearly.’ I didn’t write down
what the person was saying to me over the phone, so then
I forgot what they had said. Then I was getting frustrated,
‘Did you actually speak to me? Oh $*@* I forgot
about that!’
Furthermore, if the students were distracted or interrupted
while performing a task, they tended to lose their focus and
abandon their structured approach.
SA3 – When I was going to the patient I was paged, so I
forgot to finish the ABCDE. I didn’t really assess the patient
properly.
The students put these errors down to the fact that they
have never been in that situation before.
SA2 – On Preparation for Practice I have my FY1 and she
makes all the decisions and I just follow her around
Students felt that shadowing FY1s had not fully prepared
them for making decisions as FY1s.
SE6 – We’ve been shadowing FY1s but they are the ones
making decisions and they are the ones who are stressed out.
Group comparison
There were no clear differences between the three groups. In
addition, the number of students involved in the study was too
small to make any significant comment on whether or not the
tutorial helped the students to overcome the cognitive bias in
the first scenario, i.e. the suggestion of an incorrect diagnosis.
Discussion
The key findings of this study are discussed in two sections;
students’ decision-making and the teaching intervention.
Students’ decision making
Medical students lack effective prioritisation strategies, and
described current prioritisation teaching as being extremely
limited. In addition, students’ behaviours in simulator scenarios
suggest they are unprepared for complex decision making
such as prioritisation and multi-tasking. Current FY1 shadow-
ing programmes including group-based simulations do not
appear to fully prepare undergraduates for work as an FY1,
particularly with regards to their individual ownership of
complex clinical decisions. However, experiencing complex,
individual decision making situations through simulation has
the potential to make students more prepared for work as
FY1s.
Students had little, if any, experience of making a number
of decisions that they will be expected to make when they start
work, despite the introduction of a prolonged FY1 shadowing
programme. Shadowing programmes have a number of
benefits; resulting in students feeling more prepared for
work (Cave et al. 2009), gaining familiarity with their work
environment (Jones et al. 2006) and improving their confi-
dence with prescribing medications (Medical Education
England 2010). However, FY1 shadowing may be limited in
terms of providing students with meaningful exposure to the
responsibility for decision making, and in preparing them for
dealing with the multiple tasks that they will be asked to do as
FY1s.
The students had not previously experienced situations
where they had been asked to prioritise between patients,
which they will have to do when they start work. This is
consistent with previous research which showed that students
are not prepared for practice in the areas of prioritisation
(Tallentire et al. 2011) and knowing when to request help
(Illing et al. 2008).
The lack of literature and discussion around prioritisation is
not unique to medicine. Lake (2005) found that, ‘effective
nursing prioritisation of the patient need for care is integral to
daily nursing practice but there is no formal acknowledgement
or study of this concept’.
The results from this study suggest that prioritisation
teaching interventions need not be complex, and improve-
ments in students’ prioritisation strategies may be achievable
using a simulator. Simple measures, such as teaching medical
students to ask for a patient’s observations over the phone, or
telling students to keep a list of tasks to be done, may turn out
to be effective. More work is required in this area.
Preparing students for decision making
e513
The students’ difficulties when distracted from a task by an
interruption, or when given multiple tasks to do, are perhaps
natural and understandable. However, these are situations that
they will frequently encounter when they start work as FY1s,
and yet the students rarely, if ever, encounter these situations
during current undergraduate programmes.
Recent studies have demonstrated why doctors need to
multi-task. Tipping et al. (2010) found that for 16% of hospital
doctors’ time, more than one event was occurring simulta-
neously (i.e. multi-tasking). In addition, Weigl et al. (2011)
found that the frequency of hospital doctors’ workflow
interruptions was high. Telephones and bleepers were the
most frequently recorded type of workflow interruption.
A recent paper by Eva (2009) has suggested that in the
domain of clinical decision making, mistakes are necessary
evils when trying to induce learning. In our study, it was
evident from the interviews that students were making such
mistakes in a safe, simulated environment. Individual simula-
tion exercises such as the one in this study may enable medical
students to improve their decision making without jeopardis-
ing the care of real patients.
Teaching intervention
The tool. Medical students perceive a benefit from using the
structured approaches ABCDE and SBAR when assessing
patients and asking for help, respectively. Furthermore, the
concept of a clinical decision making tool which encourages a
structured approach to decision making is welcomed by
students. Students found that existing tools, with which they
were familiar, were very useful and helped to reduce their
stress levels. It has been shown that high levels of stress can
interfere with cognitive functions (Bourne & Yaroush 2003),
therefore if a decision making tool could be applied, this could
be very beneficial.
However, the ‘AM I HERO NOW’ tool, although introduced,
was not actually used by students as a decision making tool
during their simulated practice in this study.
With hindsight, students viewed a structure or tool for
decision making as potentially useful. It is therefore possible
that the ‘AM I HERO NOW’ tool would have been used by the
participants if it had been introduced, taught and demonstrated
to students at an earlier stage in their curriculum, using a more
interactive format, similar to the way the ABCDE approach or
SBAR is taught. A main reason for not using ‘AM I HERO NOW’
appeared to be lack of familiarity and so the concept of a
decision making tool may yet be worthwhile.
The tutorial. The impact of teaching decision making cog-
nitive theory using this study’s model is not clear.
Students could remember concepts from the tutorial when
interviewed, and some did spot the cognitive bias which had
been included, i.e. the incorrect diagnosis in the confused
patient scenario. Whether these findings constitute a measur-
able, beneficial impact on the students’ approach to decision
making is difficult to know, as some of the students in the
other group were able to overcome the suggested incorrect
diagnosis without having the tutorial.
A significant difficulty with delivering a tutorial is the
uncertainty from the literature on how students should be
taught to make clinical decisions. Some authors encourage
raising awareness of cognitive dispositions to respond (CDRs)
(Croskerry 2005) and adopting metacognitive, analytical
approaches to problems (Elstein & Schwarz 2002), while
others (Norman 2009; Norman & Eva 2010) specifically
encourage teaching both analytical and non-analytical
approaches. Future studies may give conclusive answers to
the question of which approach works best for junior doctors,
but this remains a very complex area.
The simulation session. The students were overwhelmingly
positive about the individual simulation session, and showed
evidence of quickly adapting and learning how to prioritise
and make referrals. The students gained confidence from the
simulation and felt that they were more prepared for working
as FY1s afterwards. Specifically, they acknowledged an
improved understanding, as compared with any learning to
date, of their personal responsibility for decision making.
However, it remains to be seen whether these findings
translate into better judgements regarding when to ask for help
once the students start work, especially given the number of
influences involved in making clinical decisions (Stewart
2008). The students felt that the simulator session was more
beneficial than the tutorial or the decision-making tool.
Limitations
In this study, the researcher that conducted the interviews also
delivered the tutorial and the tool to the students. The
participants may have therefore been biased towards giving
answers that they perceived the researcher wished to hear.
However, triangulation of interview data with real time
observation during the simulator may have reduced this bias.
There may have been a selection bias, as only volunteers
from a group of final year medical students from a single
medical school took part in the study. However, we conducted
this as a pilot study and future research will determine the
generalisability of the findings. Although the number of
participants is acceptable for a pilot study of qualitative
nature, the credibility may have been increased with larger
number of participants. In this study, students’ perceptions of
the teaching intervention were explored to assess its effec-
tiveness. While this has yielded findings of note, an additional
objective means of assessing students’ performance, if avail-
able and applicable to this setting, would have given more
reliable findings.
In this study, we assumed that all participating students had
the same level of knowledge. However, lack of knowledge of
a particular topic may have influenced individual students’
clinical decision making.
Future work
The research team are now exploring the practicalities
involved in extending this study to a much larger cohort in
2012 and in obtaining longitudinal evaluation of benefit from
the initial study group. Using a larger cohort would enable a
C. A. McGregor et al.
e514
more meaningful statistical comparison of quantitative data
which would minimise some of the limitations of this pilot
study outlined above.
Conclusions
In this pilot study, we have demonstrated that medical students
remain not fully prepared for working as junior doctors.
Awareness of, and preparedness for, the doctor’s personal
responsibility for decision-making were key components that
were lacking. Students need further guidance on how to make
key clinical decisions as junior doctors, especially in relation to
making a diagnosis, prioritisation, and asking for help.
Although clinical decision making is a complex process,
certain ‘teaching’ interventions, such as using structured
approaches and individual simulation sessions can be effec-
tive. However, further studies are necessary to examine the
impact of these educational interventions on day-to-day
clinical practice.
Declaration of interest: The authors report no declarations
of interest.
Notes on contributors
CALUM A MCGREGOR, MBChB, MRCP (UK), MMed, is an ST6 in Acute
Medicine in the West of Scotland, currently based at Glasgow’s Western
Infirmary. When this project took place, he was a Clinical Teaching Fellow
with NHS Lanarkshire’s Department of Medical Education, and has recently
completed a Masters Degree in Medical Education from the University of
Dundee.
CATHERINE PATON, BA Health Studies, is a clinical skills consultant, based
at NHS Lanarkshire’s Medical Education Training Centre in Bothwell, and
has extensive experience of resuscitation and clinical skills training.
CALUM THOMSON, RGN, RMN, BSc Advanced Nursing, was appointed
professional lead for Clinical Practice Development with NHS National
Services Scotland in 2010. Prior to this, he worked for NHS Lanarkshire’s
Department of Medical Education, and has extensive experience of
resuscitation and clinical skills training.
MADAWA CHANDRATILAKE, is a research officer at the University of
Dundee’s Centre for Medical Education, and his research interests include
professionalism and assessment.
HAZEL SCOTT, MD FRCP, is a consultant respiratory physician with NHS
Lanarkshire and is director of Deanery Development/associate postgrad-
uate dean in the West of Scotland Deanery. Prior to this appointment,
Professor Scott was director of NHS Lanarkshire’s Department of Medical
Education.
References
Berner ES, Graber ML. 2008. Overconfidence as a cause of diagnostic error
in medicine. Am J Med 121(5S):2–23.
Bourne LE, Yaroush RA. 2003. Stress and cognition: A cognitive
psychological perspective. Washington, DC: National Aeronautics
and Space Administration [Published 2010 April 19]. Available from:
http://humansystems.arc.nasa.gov/eas/download/non_EAS/Stress_and_
Cognition.pdf
Cave J, Woolf K, Jones A, Dacre J. 2009. Easing the transition from student
to doctor: How can medical schools help prepare their graduates for
starting work? Med Teach 31(5):403–408.
Croskerry P. 2003. The importance of cognitive errors in diagnosis and
strategies to minimize them. Acad Med 78:77–78.
Croskerry P. 2005. Diagnostic failure: A cognitive and affective approach.
In: Henriksen K, Battles JB, Marks ES, Lewin DI, editors. Advances in
patient safety: From research to implementation. Rockville, MD: Agency
for Health Care Research and Quality. Ch. 5: 252.
Croskerry P. 2009. Clinical cognition and diagnostic error: Applications of a
dual process model of reasoning. Adv Health Sci Educ 14(1):27–35.
Dent JA, Harden RM. 2009. A practical guide for medical teachers. 3rd ed.
Edinburgh: Elsevier Health Sciences.
Elstein AS, Schwarz A. 2002. Clinical problem-solving and diagnostic
decision-making: A selective review of the cognitive literature. BMJ
324:729–732.
Eva KW. 2005. What every teacher needs to know about clinical reasoning.
Med Educ 39:98–106.
Eva KW. 2009. Diagnostic error in medical education: Where wrongs can
make rights. Adv Health Sci Educ 14:71–81.
Eva KW, Hatala RM, LeBlanc VR, Brooks LR. 2007. Teaching from the
clinical reasoning literature: Combined reasoning strategies help novice
diagnosticians overcome misleading information. Med Educ
41(12):1152–1158.
Featherstone DE. 2005. Interview with Frances A. Griffen, Institute for
Healthcare Improvement. Interview by Diane E. Featherston. J Nurs
Care Qual 20(4):369–372.
GMC. 2009. Tomorrow’s doctors: Outcomes and standards for under-
graduate medical education. London: General Medical Council.
Graber ML. 2005. Diagnostic error in internal medicine. Arch Intern Med
165:1493–1499.
Illing J, Morrow G, Kergon C, Burford B, Spencer J, Peile E, Davies C,
Baldouf B, Allen M, Johnson N, et al. 2008. How prepared are medical
graduates to begin practice? A comparison of three diverse UK medical
schools. Final Report for the GMC Education Committee. General
Medical Council/Northern Deanery.
Jevon P. 2010. Assessment of critically ill patients: The ABCDE approach. Br
J Healthcare Assist 4(8):404–407.
Jones A, Willis SC, McArdle PJ, O’Neill PA. 2006. Learning the house officer
role: Reflections on the value of shadowing a PRHO. Med Teach
28(3):291–293.
Lake SE. 2005. Nursing prioritisation of the patient need for care: Tacit
knowledge of clinical decision making in nursing. [Published 2010
November 23]. Available from: http://researcharchive.vuw.ac.nz/bit-
stream/handle/10063/22/thesis.pdf?sequence=6
Lundberg GD. 1998. Low tech autopsies in the era of high tech medicine:
Continued value for quality assurance and patient safety. J Am Med
Assoc 280:1273–1274.
Medical Education England 2010. Survey of shadowing completed by the
appointees to the foundation programme, undertaking shadowing at
the Royal Free Hospital. London: Medical Education England.
Norman G. 2005. Research in clinical reasoning: Past history and current
trends. Med Educ 39(4):418–427.
Norman G. 2009. Dual processing and diagnostic errors. Adv Health Sci
Educ 14:37–39.
Norman GR, Eva KW. 2010. Diagnostic error and clinical reasoning. Med
Educ 44:94–100.
Runciman WB, Kluger MT, Morris RW, Paix AD, Watterson LM, Webb RK.
2005. Crisis management during anaesthesia: The development
of an anaesthetic crisis management manual. Qual Saf Health Care
14(3):e1.
Stewart J. 2008. To call or not to call: A judgement of risk by pre-registration
house officers. Med Educ 42(9):938–944.
Sullivan DJ. 2009. How physicians think: The cognitive autopsy. James D
Mills Jr. memorial lecture. (Online) [Published 2010 March 14].
Available from: http://www.hornlakeprofessionalbuilding.com/data/
papers/WE-207.pdf
Tallentire VR, Smith SE, Wylde K, Cameron HS. 2011. Are medical
graduates ready to face the challenges of foundation training? Postgrad
Med J 87(1031):590–595.
Tipping MD, Forth VE, O’Leary KJ, Malkenson DM, Magill DB, Englert K,
Williams MV. 2010. Where did they go? A time motion study of
hospitalists. J Hosp Med 5(6):323–328.
Weigl M, Muller A, Zupanc A, Glaser J, Angerer P. 2011. Hospital doctors’
workflow interruptions and activities: An observation study. BMJ Qual
Saf 20(6):491–497.
Preparing students for decision making
e515
Appendix
Checklists for simulator session
STUDENT NAME
Assessment and T reatment of Chest Pain Scenario
Record if done
1) Introduces self to patient. Check/Assess the airway (A)
Notes Patient able to talk therefore airway patent.
Assesses for tracheal deviation
Asks patient to report if in pain. (Central Chest pain radiating to L arm) Explain actions and treatment.
2) Check/Assess breathing (B)
Checks Respiratory rate
Checks if Breathing symmetrical
Assesses air entry – Bilateral air entry. No abnormal sounds
Checks for Cyanosis
Commences High Flow 02 via non-rebreathing mask as no history of Type II respiratory failure – info given to students
Requests/attaches SPO2
3) Check/Assess circulation (C)
Looks for Diaphoretic?
Checks Capillary Refill Time
Checks Pulse Rate
Monitoring Attach/request cardiac monitoring heart rate
Checks BP, attach request blood pressure cuff
Listens to heart sounds
Requests/Explains need for 12 lead ECG
4) Diagnosis, Treatment and Management
Inserts IV access
Correctly interprets information from history, exam and ECG findings – i.e. diagnoses acute coronary syndrome *
Initiates treatment for ACS MONA (Morphine, Oxygen, Nitrate, Aspirin) *
Recognises limitations and asks for help *
Marker’s Signature _________________________________
Marker’s Name ( print)_______________________________
STUDENT NAME
Confused Patient Scenario
Record if done
1) Introduces self to patient. Check/Assess the airway (A)
Notes Patient able to communicate, therefore airway patent.
2) Check/Assess breathing (B)
Checks respiratory rate
Checks if breathing symmetrical?
Assesses air entry
Requests/Attaches Sats
Commences O2 where necessary
3) Check/Assess circulation (C)
Checks Capillary Refill Time
Checks Pulse Rate
Checks BP
4) Disability D
Notes GCS
Undertakes Neuro Exam
5) Diagnostic Sieve before diagnosis
Considers alternatives - Looks for rash *
Considers alternatives – Looks for evidence of head injury *
Looks at drug chart *
Attempts to obtain more info (notes/nursing staff) to ascertain patient’s normal level of functioning *
Asks for BM without prompting *
6) Diagnosis and Management
Treats BM appropriately *
Thinks about measures to prevent further hypo after correction (regular BMs, reduce insulin, long-acting carbohydrate etc.) *
Marker’s Signature _________________________________
Marker’s Name ( print)_______________________________
* represented the actions most relevant to clinical decision making
C. A. McGregor et al.
e516
STUDENT NAME
Prioritisation Scenario Hypotensive Man
Record if done
1) Introduces self to patient. Check/Assess the airway (A)
Notes Patient able to talk so airway patent.
Assesses for tracheal deviation as potentially fatal sign
2) Check/Assess breathing (B)
Checks Respiratory rate
Checks Breathing symmetrical?
Assesses air entry
Commences High Flow 02 via non-rebreather mask as no history of Type II respiratory failure
Requests/attaches SPO2
3) Check/Assess circulation (C)
Checks Capillary Refill Time
Checks Pulse Rate
Checks BP
Listens to heart sounds
Checks for peripheral oedema
Looks for signs of haemorrhage around bed *
4) Disability D
Comments on GCS or AVPU
5) Management
Correctly identifies hypotensive patient as high priority *
Correctly prioritises urgent nature of situation and attends patient *
Asks for/looks at fluid balance chart *
Asks for/looks at drug chart *
Send bloods for FBC, U and Es etc
Asks for ECG *
Inserts IV access if not already obtained
Gives fluid challenge quickly *
Re-assesses patient post fluid challenge*
Marker’s Signature _________________________________
Marker’s Name ( print)_______________________________
* represented the actions most relevant to clinical decision making
Preparing students for decision making
e517
Copyright of Medical Teacher is the property of Taylor & Francis Ltd and its content may not be copied or
emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.
However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.