TITLE: The benefits of flexibility: the pedagogical value of instructions to adopt multifaceted diagnostic reasoning strategies
AUTHORS: Tavinder K Ark, Lee R Brooks, Kevin W Eva
YEAR: 2007
DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2929.2007.02688.x

CONTENT:
The beneﬁts of ﬂexibility: the pedagogical value of
instructions to adopt multifaceted diagnostic
reasoning strategies
Tavinder K Ark, Lee R Brooks & Kevin W Eva
OBJECTIVES Building on the advice of previous
research to avoid parsing diagnostic strategies too
ﬁnely, recent studies have shown that teaching
novices to utilise analytic and non-analytic reasoning
strategies yields higher diagnostic accuracy than
teaching either in isolation. This study assesses the
extent to which students spontaneously adopt a
combined approach and compares its beneﬁts with
those experienced with a contrastive learning strategy
known to enhance analogical transfer.
METHODS A sample of 48 naı ¨ve students were
trained to identify features on electrocardiograms
(ECGs) and assign diagnoses. Half the participants
learned in a standard manner, encountering diag-
noses (and their associated features) in sequence.
The remaining participants were explicitly instructed
to draw comparisons between the diagnostic category
being learned and another confusable diagnostic
category (contrastive learning). Half the participants
in both groups were further instructed to carefully
identify all features while trusting guidance provided
by feelings of familiarity (a combined reasoning
strategy). The remaining participants were given
no instructions on how to approach the diagnostic
task.
RESULTS Greater diagnostic accuracy was achieved
following both contrastive learning and instructions
to use a combined reasoning strategy relative to the
control conditions. These variables did not interact
with each other, nor did they interact with novelty of
the test case. The effects were observed immediately
after learning and following a 1-week delay.
DISCUSSION The results emphasise the importance
of explicitly empowering students to utilise multiple
diagnostic strategies, including non-analytic approa-
ches. In addition, this study reveals the beneﬁt that
can be gained from contrastive learning in a medical
domain.
KEYWORDS education, medical, undergraduate ⁄
*methods; teaching ⁄ *methods; *diagnosis;
psychology ⁄ *education; cardiology ⁄ *education;
decision making; clinical competence ⁄ *standards;
electrocardiography.
Medical Education 2007; 41: 281–287
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2929.2007.02688.x
INTRODUCTION
One of the ongoing debates in medical education
focuses upon the extent to which various models of
diagnostic decision-making best characterise the
diagnostic expertise of doctors.
1 The goal is to
capture the essence of expertise in a manner that can
be taught to novices, thus increasing the efﬁciency
with which they become experts. This work began in
the 1970s with Elstein et al.’s presentation of the
hypothetico-deductive model of reasoning
2 and
quickly evolved into a plethora of competing theories.
Reviews of clinical reasoning began to be published
as early as 1996.
3 The conclusion of Custers et al.’s
review was that many forms of knowledge are avail-
able to clinicians and, as a result, attempts to
determine how various forms of knowledge are
co-ordinated during diagnosis are more likely to
yield dividends than attempts to prove any single
framework correct.
3
clinical reasoning
Department of Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, McMaster
University, Hamilton, Ontario L8N 3Z5, Canada
Correspondence: Kevin W Eva, MDCL 3522, McMaster University, 1200
Main Street West, Hamilton, Ontario L8N 3Z5, Canada.
Tel: 00 1 905 525 9140 ext. 27241; Fax: 00 1 905 572 7099;
E-mail: evakw@mcmaster.ca
/C211 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2007. MEDICAL EDUCATION 2007; 41: 281–287 281
Multiple studies have supported this contention, as
does the overwhelmingly robust phenomenon of
context speciﬁcity, but only recently has anyone
begun to experimentally test the practical implica-
tions of a /C212combined/C213, /C212ﬂexible/C213or /C212multifaceted/C213
model of clinical reasoning.
4 Building on the work of
Norman et al.,5 Ark et al.6 tested the efﬁcacy of
a variety of instructions provided to novice readers of
electrocardiograms (ECGs). An analytic (i.e. /C212feature
ﬁrst/C213) strategy was promoted by stressing the import-
ance of carefully considering the features present on
an ECG before considering potential diagnoses. That
is, participants were instructed to approach the task
of ECG diagnosis in a systematic and controlled
manner. By contrast, other participants were
encouraged to use a non-analytic (i.e. /C212ﬁrst impres-
sion/C213) strategy in that they were instructed simply to
trust feelings of familiarity given that a presenting
ECG might appear similar to other ECGs that had
been seen during training. Another group of partic-
ipants was given both sets of instructions (i.e. to
adopt a /C212combined/C213strategy of trusting familiarity
while double checking ﬁrst impressions by carefully
considering the features). When tested, participants
given either set of non-combined instructions
demonstrated equal diagnostic accuracy, but their
performance was poor compared with that of
participants who had been given a combined
instruction. This was true for each of the 3 distinct
ways the combined reasoning strategy was
operationalised (i.e. regardless of whether the
instruction to systematically consider the features
presented in a case was given simultaneously or
sequentially with the instruction to use familiarity, or
whether the instruction to utilise familiarity was given
explicitly or implicitly).
Still at issue, however, is whether or not promoting
a co-ordinated approach (i.e. a combined strategy)
to diagnostic decision making actually improves
performance. One could justiﬁably argue that
trainees would naturally and spontaneously adopt a
combined approach to diagnostic reasoning and that
the differences observed by Ark et al.
6 were due to
the detrimental impact of prompting participants to
use one or the other strategy in isolation. To truly
determine whether or not an explicit instruction to
utilise a combined strategy is beneﬁcial requires an
additional control group of participants who are left
to their own devices – a group of participants who are
instructed to adopt freely whatever diagnostic strategy
seems most reasonable given the categorisation
scheme they are trying to learn. The need to assess
such a comparison provided the ﬁrst objective of this
study.
The second objective was to compare the magnitude
of beneﬁt of an instruction to use a combined
reasoning strategy with that of another strategy that
has proven successful in increasing the rate of
analogical transfer in non-medical domains. Analo-
gical transfer is deﬁned by psychologists as successful
problem solving through the use of solution
principles that were learned in response to problems
encountered previously.
7 That is, solutions are
transferred from one problem to another by way of
analogy. For example, learning the role that acid-base
balance plays in a particular clinical context can
provide a useful analogy to help one understand the
physiological mechanism associated with another
clinical presentation dependent on homeostasis.
That being said, the rate at which transfer occurs
tends to be counter-intuitively low, a phenomenon
that has been argued to be a root cause of context
speciﬁcity.
8 Moreover, studies have shown that simply
stating the solution principles and providing exam-
ples is insufﬁcient to help learners apply the princi-
ples when trying to solve new cases.
9,10 Many learning
clinical reasoning
Overview
What is already known on this subject
Various models of diagnostic reasoning have
found support in the literature as hallmarks of
expertise, but these models need not be
considered mutually exclusive.
What this study adds
Evidence that an explicit instruction to utilise
both analytic and non-analytic forms of diag-
nostic reasoning can improve novice clini-
cians’ diagnostic accuracy beyond that
achieved by the spontaneous approaches they
adopt without such an explicit instruction.
Suggestions for further research
Future research might determine which sti-
mulus-based and diagnostician-based factors
lead clinicians to adopt a less than optimally
balanced approach to clinical reasoning, when
such factors increase the rate of diagnostic
errors, and whether or not particular actions
might help diagnosticians maintain a balanced
approach.
282
/C211 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2007. MEDICAL EDUCATION 2007; 41: 281–287
strategies have been identiﬁed that can improve rates
of transfer, but the generalisability of many of these
ﬁndings to the ﬁeld of medicine has yet to be tested.
In other domains contrastive learning has arguably
been shown to be the most successful strategy for
enhancing transfer rates in problem solvers and it is
certainly among the most extensively studied
strategies.
11–13 Contrastive learning involves
prompting the learner to explicitly search for
similarities and differences between problems. Doing
so, it is thought, enables students to better avoid
being distracted by the superﬁcial surface elements of
problems (e.g. the speciﬁc clinical presentation) by
helping them understand the underlying deep
structure (e.g. the pathophysiology of the disease)
that enables the solution principle to be applied
across variable problems. Although some would
argue that true analogical transfer can only succeed
by virtue of making a comparison across the deep
structural level of problems, it is plausible that
promotion of a contrastive learning style would also
help students in tasks like ECG diagnosis by assisting
them to learn the critical features that discriminate
between categories. That is, highlighting the similar-
ities and differences between disorders in terms of
the features present on an ECG might make the
diagnosticity of each symptom more apparent or
more inﬂuential in helping students learn to
discriminate between categories. Hatala et al.
14 have
already demonstrated the value of /C212mixed practice /C213.
After learning the basics of ECG interpretation,
participants in their study had the opportunity to
practise ECG diagnosis via the presentation of ECGs
that had not been sorted into disorders, but were
mixed across the various diagnoses.
14 The current
study extends these ﬁndings by testing the value of
implementing a contrastive learning approach during
the initial learning of the categorisation scheme.
Participants in the contrastive learning condition
were asked to explicitly compare diagnostic
categories that were:
1 similar by virtue of their having features in
common, and
2 known to be easily confusable based on the results
of previous studies.
For example, participants were asked to compare and
contrast the features of ischaemia with those of left
ventricular hypertrophy with strain; both share S )T
depression and T wave inversions in many of the
leads on an ECG. This instructional manipulation was
contrasted with a non-contrastive condition in which
normal practices were applied: participants were
asked to learn the features of a series of diseases in
sequence, as they would when working through most
courses and textbooks.
15
In summary, half the participants were asked to study
the ECG features present in a series of cardiologic
disorders without explicit reference being made to the
value of comparing and contrasting any particular
disorder with another (i.e. the non-contrastive learn-
ing condition). The other half of the participants were
asked to learn the disorders in the same sequence, but
learners were told to intentionally consider the
similarities and differences between pairs of disorders
(i.e. the contrastive learning condition). Within each
of these groups, half the participants were instructed
to trust any sense of familiarity they might have when
diagnosing test cases while also carefully considering
features (i.e. the combined reasoning condition),
whereas the other half were given no instructions
regarding how best to approach the diagnosis of test
cases (i.e. the spontaneous reasoning condition). If
learners tend spontaneously to utilise a combined
approach successfully, then explicit instructions to
adopt this approach would be expected to have
minimal effect. Any differences observed across these
2 variables would, however, provide a pedagogic
strategy to enable implementation of the literatures
on clinical reasoning and analogical transfer in
clinical teaching contexts.
METHODS
Participants
A sample of 48 undergraduate psychology students
enrolled at McMaster University participated in this
3-phase experiment for course credit. None of the
participants had previous experience with ECGs.
Design and procedure
Training phase
Using the material developed by Norman et al.,
5 all
participants were taught general information
regarding the 12 leads in an ECG during one-to-one
teaching sessions with the experimenter. They were
then taught to recognise the general structures of
a normal ECG waveform (i.e. P wave, QRS complex,
S)T segment and T wave).
After this introduction participants were randomly
assigned to 1 of 2 learning conditions. Those in the
283
/C211 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2007. MEDICAL EDUCATION 2007; 41: 281–287
non-contrastive condition were taught each of 8
diagnostic categories, beginning with normal, using
a feature list containing the key features for each
diagnosis. For example, right bundle branch block
was presented as typically having:
• RSR (rabbit ears) present in V1 and V2, and
• a widened QRS complex.
16
For each diagnostic category, participants were pre-
sented with 4 examples. For the ﬁrst 2 ECGs in each
category, the instructor identiﬁed key features that
were indicative of that particular disorder using the
feature list. For the latter 2, participants were asked to
identify the relevant features before moving onto the
next diagnostic category. This process was repeated
until all diagnostic categories and their examples
were presented. On average, this learning task
required approximately 35 minutes to complete.
The procedure for participants assigned to the
contrastive learning condition was identical, with
the exception that, instead of merely identifying the
features, participants were asked to compare and
contrast the features present on each example with
those of a normal ECG and with those of
a confusable differential. For example, participants
were asked to compare and contrast the ﬁrst 2 slides
in the set of 4 examples of left ventricular hyper-
trophy with those of a normal ECG by identifying
features that were similar and dissimilar. They were
then asked to compare and contrast the latter 2
examples with 2 examples of ischaemia (a disorder
that was known to be confusable, given our prior
work). Participants were encouraged to self-generate
the similarities and differences between categories
as much as possible. However, in instances where
they failed, the instructor would provide hints at the
differences. This process was repeated until all
diagnostic categories had been considered. On
average, training time for participants in the
contrastive learning condition was 5–10 minutes
longer than that in the non-contrastive learning
condition.
Immediate test phase
After the training phase, participants were presented
with a booklet consisting of 7 ECGs that had been
randomly selected from the training materials.
During this phase, participants were randomly
further divided into 1 of 2 reasoning conditions.
To emphasise a combined diagnostic strategy, half
the participants were given the following instructions,
which were intended to emphasise the value of both
analytic and non-analytic approaches (i.e. combined
instructions) to medical diagnosis:
/C212For each ECG, assign a diagnosis using similarity as
a guide. New ECGs often look like ECGs that have
been seen before (i.e. during training). Trust this
sense of familiarity, but realise that basing decisions
solely on similarity can lead to diagnostic errors.
So, don/C213t jump the gun. Use the response sheet list
to indicate the features that can be seen. Use the
disease list to help you.’
By contrast, participants in the spontaneous reason-
ing condition were told to:
/C212Assign a diagnosis to each ECG using whatever
strategy comes naturally to you. Feel free to use the
feature list, but approach each case using whatever
strategy seems most appropriate to help you reach
the correct diagnosis. /C213
All participants were allowed to view the ECG when
assigning their diagnosis. They were told the correct
answer after diagnosing each ECG. Whenever an
incorrect diagnosis was assigned, immediate feedback
was given that reinforced the instructions that had
been provided.
Delayed test phase
One week after training, participants were presented
with a booklet of 15 ECGs; 8 were novel and 7 had
been seen during training but were distinct from the
ECGs seen during the immediate test phase. Partic-
ipants were given the same reasoning instructions as
those they had received during the immediate test
phase and were asked to diagnose each ECG. Feed-
back was not provided during this phase of the
experiment.
RESULTS
Diagnostic accuracy
Participants’ diagnostic accuracy was submitted to
a repeated measures analysis of variance ( ANOVA) with
learning instruction (contrastive ⁄non-contrastive)
and reasoning instruction (combined ⁄spontaneous)
as between-subject grouping factors. The mean
proportion correct (as a function of learning
condition, reasoning instruction and test) is
illustrated in Table 1. Participants in the contrastive
learning condition performed signiﬁcantly better
clinical reasoning284
/C211 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2007. MEDICAL EDUCATION 2007; 41: 281–287
than those in the non-contrastive learning condition
(F1,572 ¼ 19.2, P < 0.05). Those in the combined
reasoning condition signiﬁcantly outperformed those
in the spontaneous reasoning condition
(F
1,572 ¼ 17.9, P < 0.05). These 2 variables did not
interact with each other. Nor did they interact with
test (i.e. the differences were consistent, both
immediately after training and after a 1-week delay).
In addition, the delayed test data were analysed
separately to consider the impact novelty of the
stimulus had on the results. The mean proportion
correct (as a function of learning condition, reason-
ing instruction and novelty) is illustrated in Table 2.
Previously seen ECGs were diagnosed more accu-
rately than novel ECGs ( F
1,572 ¼ 10.7, P < 0.05). The
interactions between novelty and learning condition
and between novelty and reasoning instruction were
both non-signiﬁcant.
Feature identiﬁcation
Previous work has suggested that a combined
reasoning approach to ECG diagnosis results in
better performance relative to when trainees are
instructed to be very analytic due to a decrease in the
diagnostician’s tendency to be distracted by mislead-
ing features.
5,6 The feature data in this study, how-
ever, were not analysed as a function of reasoning
instruction because it is impossible to know which
features the spontaneous reasoning group identiﬁed
as participants in that group were not instructed to
record the features they considered. This was to avoid
biasing their spontaneous approach to reasoning, but
it makes any feature comparison across reasoning
conditions meaningless.
The feature data provided by the combined reason-
ing group were analysed as a function of learning
condition for the sake of completeness, but there was
no a priori reason to expect a difference between
contrastive and non-contrastive learning conditions
on this variable. For each ECG, features were
categorised as:
1 hit-indicative (a feature that was present and
indicative of the correct diagnosis);
2 hit-not indicative (a feature that was present but
indicative of another diagnosis), or
3 false alarm (a feature that was not present in the
ECG).
An
ANOVA analogous to that performed on diagnostic
accuracy was performed on the number of features
identiﬁed within each feature classiﬁcation. The
mean number of features identiﬁed as a function
of classiﬁcation and learning instruction is presented
in Table 3. No signiﬁcant difference was found
between the learning conditions (contrastive
and non-contrastive) in any of the features
classiﬁcations ( F
1,572 > 0.22, P > 0.05 for all
comparisons).
DISCUSSION
Across a series of studies, instructions to be both
feature-oriented and to trust similarity-based reason-
Table 1 Mean diagnostic accuracy (%) as a function of learning condition, reasoning instruction and moment of test
Immediate test Delayed test
Contrastive learning Non-contrastive learning Average Contrastive learning Non-contrastive learning Average
Combined instructions 83.3 77.4 80.4 75.6 58.3 66.9
Spontaneous instructions 76.2 63.1 69.6 59.4 54.4 56.9
Average 79.8 70.2 75.0 67.5 56.4 61.9
Table 2 Mean diagnostic accuracy (%) on the delayed test as a function of learning condition, reasoning instruction and novelty of the stimulus
Previously seen electrocardiograms Novel electrocardiograms
Contrastive learning Non-contrastive learning Average Contrastive learning Non-contrastive learning Average
Combined instructions 81.0 69.0 75.0 70.8 49.0 59.9
Spontaneous instructions 72.6 66.7 69.7 47.9 43.8 45.9
Average 76.8 67.9 72.3 59.4 46.4 52.9
285
/C211 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2007. MEDICAL EDUCATION 2007; 41: 281–287
ing strategies (i.e. a combined approach to clinical
reasoning) have led to signiﬁcantly better diagnostic
performance than alternative sets of instructions.
Prior work compared instructions to use a combined
reasoning strategy with instructions to use either of
this strategy’s components in isolation, and found the
combined reasoning strategy to be superior. This
study adds a comparison with the natural tendencies
of novice diagnosticians, thus conﬁrming that,
indeed, instructions to utilise a combined reasoning
strategy can improve performance above and beyond
what can be expected in the absence of such
instructions. However, based on these results, we
cannot make conclusive statements about whether
participants in the spontaneous reasoning condition
did or did not implement a combined reasoning
strategy or whether they did so but less effectively.
Our suspicion is the latter. The consistency with
which /C212old/C213(i.e. previously seen) ECGs were diag-
nosed more accurately than /C212new/C213ECGs suggests that
similarity-based processes were operational in all
conditions, although past work leads us to assume
these processes were applied unconsciously in many
instances. Moreover, it is implausible that
participants would exert no effort in trying carefully
to consider the features present on an ECG and
match them to the possible diagnostic categories,
given that the diagnostic categories were deﬁned
during training based upon the features, and that all
participants had a feature list available to them when
making their diagnoses. Thus, despite the likelihood
that some form of combined reasoning will be
adopted spontaneously by diagnosticians, the
provision of explicit and concrete instructions
regarding how to do so appears to be beneﬁcial.
In addition, this study revealed that learners who were
instructed to compare and contrast categories (those
in the contrastive condition) achieved greater diag-
nostic accuracy than those who were simply told to
learn the relationship between the features and
disorders (those in the non-contrastive condition).
One plausible, although speculative, explanation for
this ﬁnding is that participants in the contrastive
condition better understood the diagnosticity of each
symptom. That is, they were less likely to fall victim to
premature closure due to an increased awareness that
a feature indicative of a particular disorder can also be
indicative of another diagnosis. Whether or not this
mechanism provides the best explanation for these
ﬁndings requires further study. Nevertheless, it
appears safe to conclude that the beneﬁts of
contrastive learning (relative to the more traditional
non-contrastive approach to learning) that have been
found in the psychology literature on transfer do
generalise to the domain of medicine (at least with
highly visual tasks like ECG diagnosis). Moreover, it
appears to be equally effective relative to the strategy of
instructing learners to adopt a combined reasoning
approach. However, it should be noted that although
participants in the contrastive learning condition
spent slightly more time studying the material than
participants in the non-contrastive learning condition,
no such time-on-task differences confound the com-
parisons of combined versus spontaneous instructions.
It is worth emphasising that the conclusion that
contrastive learning and combined reasoning
instructions hold pedagogical value applies readily to
the most ecologically valuable condition – the pres-
entation of novel ECGs after a time delay. These
instructions enabled 70% accuracy even when ECGs
that had never been seen before were presented to
participants a full week after their initial training
(Table 2, novel ECGs). It is also worth noting that
comparison of the other half of Table 2 (previously
seen ECGs) with the results of the immediate test
condition illustrated in Table 1 (in which all ECGs
were previously seen yet unique from the delayed test
ECGs) provides further evidence for the beneﬁt of
prior experience with speciﬁc cases. Little decline in
accuracy was observed over the course of the week for
ECGs that had been seen before, especially in
comparison with the magnitude of the difference
between previously seen and novel ECGs.
Limitations of this study include the fact that only 1
diagnostic domain (ECG), a highly visual domain at
that, was utilised and that our participants were
undergraduate psychology students as opposed to
medical trainees. In fact, we view the latter limitation
as a strength of the study design in the context of this
clinical reasoning
Table 3 Mean number of features identiﬁed as a function of both feature classiﬁcation and learning instruction for participants in the combined reaso ning condition
Hit indicative Hit not indicative False alarms Total features
Contrastive learning 0.877 0.136 0.326 1.33
Non-contrastive learning 0.762 0.129 0.409 1.30
Total 0.820 0.133 0.368 1.32
286
/C211 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2007. MEDICAL EDUCATION 2007; 41: 281–287
paper. In assessing whether or not diagnosticians can
beneﬁt from the instruction to trust non-analytic
processes (i.e. diagnostic strategies that have primar-
ily been considered the realm of the expert), one
would anticipate that those with more experience
would be better positioned to derive beneﬁt from
such an instruction because they have seen a larger
number of cases previously. This study, combined
with our previous work,
6 suggests that clinical
teachers should not hesitate to empower learners to
consider similarity even when the learners are
absolute novices with no prior ECG experience. The
higher diagnostic accuracy observed for /C212old/C213ECGs
relative to /C212new/C213ECGs, regardless of instructions,
suggests that very little exposure is required for
individuals to take advantage of the beneﬁts
non-analytic processes provide. Whether or not these
ﬁndings are generalisable to other domains within
medicine remains to be tested, but we have outlined
elsewhere a number of reasons why generalisability
beyond ECG diagnosis is likely.
6,17 A second
limitation of this study is its small sample size.
However, the sample size was clearly large enough for
the analyses to hold sufﬁcient power to reveal
statistically signiﬁcant differences between groups.
In conclusion, it appears that instructions to use
contrastive learning and instructions to use
combined reasoning lead to signiﬁcantly higher
diagnostic accuracy than instructions for non-
contrastive learning and student-derived reasoning
strategies, respectively. Students might naturally
utilise a combined reasoning strategy, but they appear
to do so with less beneﬁt than when they are provided
with concrete instructions regarding how to approach
the diagnostic task. Therefore, prompting novices to
consider the similarities and differences between
diagnostic categories (perhaps especially those that
are likely to form a differential diagnosis) and
providing them with explicit instructions to utilise
a combined reasoning strategy appears to represent
an effective pedagogic suggestion that can aid in the
education of novices and facilitate their progress to
a more expert level of diagnostic capability.
Contributors:
KWE and LRB conceived and designed the
study. TKA collected the data, ran the analyses and drafted
the paper. KWE and LRB made critical revisions. All
authors approved the ﬁnal version of the paper.
Acknowledgements: none.
Funding: none.
Conﬂicts of interest: none.
Ethical approval: this study was approved by the
Hamilton Health Sciences Research Ethics Board.
REFERENCES
1 Norman GR. Research in clinical reasoning: past
history and current trends. Med Educ 2005;39:418–27.
2 Elstein AS, Shulman LS, Sprafka SA. Medical Problem
Solving: an Analysis of Clinical Reasoning . Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press 1978.
3 Custers EJ, Regehr G, Norman GR. Mental represen-
tations of medical diagnostic knowledge: a review. Acad
Med 1996;71 (Suppl):55–61.
4 Eva KW. What every teacher needs to know about
clinical reasoning. Med Educ 2005;39:98–106.
5 Norman GR, Brooks LR, Colle CL, Hatala RM. The
benefit of diagnostic hypotheses in clinical reasoning:
experimental study of an instructional intervention for
forward and backward reasoning. Cognit Instruct
2000;17:433–48.
6 Ark TK, Brooks LR, Eva KW. Giving learners the best of
both worlds: do clinical teachers need to guard against
teaching pattern recognition to novices? Acad Med
2006;81:405–9.
7 Gentner D. Why we’re so smart. In: Gentner D, Gol-
dwin-Meadow S, eds. Language in Mind: Advances in the
Study of Language and Thought . Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press 2003;195–235.
8 Eva KW, Neville AJ, Norman GR. Exploring the
aetiology of content specificity: factors influencing
analogic transfer in problem solving. Acad Med 1998;73
(Suppl):1–5.
9 Gentner D, Markman AB. Structure mapping in anal-
ogy and similarity. Am Psychol 1997;52:45–56.
10 Ross BH, Kennedy PT. Generalising from the use of
earlier examples in problem solving. J Exp Psychol Learn
Mem Cogn 1990;16:42–55.
11 Gentner D, Loewenstein J, Thompson L. Learning and
transfer: a general role for analogical encoding.
J Educational Psychol 2003;95:393–408.
12 McKenzie CRM. Taking into account the strength of
an alternative hypothesis. J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn
1998;24:771–92.
13 Catrambone R, Holyoak KJ. Overcoming contextual
limitations in problem-solving transfer. J Exp Psychol
Learn Mem Cogn 1985;15:1147–56.
14 Hatala RM, Brooks LR, Norman GR. Practice makes
perfect: the critical role of mixed practice in the
acquisition of ECG interpretation skills. Adv Health Sci
Educ 2003;8:17–26.
15 Stuyt PMJ, de Vries Robbe PF, van der Meer JWM. Why
don’t medical textbooks teach? The lack of logic in the
differential diagnosis. Neth J Med 2003;61:383–7.
16 Schamroth L. An Introduction to Electrocardiography , 6th
edn. Oxford: Blackwell Scientific Publications 1982.
17 Eva KW, Norman GR. Heuristics and biases: a biased
perspective on clinical reasoning. Med Educ
2005;39:870–2.
Received 25 April 2006; editorial comments to authors 18
August 2006; accepted for publication 16 October 2006
/C211 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2007. MEDICAL EDUCATION 2007; 41: 281–287
287