TITLE: Fostering diagnostic knowledge through computer‐supported, case‐based worked examples: effects of erroneous examples and feedback
AUTHORS: Veronika Kopp, Robin Stark, Martin R Fischer
YEAR: 2008
DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2923.2008.03122.x

CONTENT:
Fostering diagnostic knowledge through computer-
supported, case-based worked examples: effects of
erroneous examples and feedback
Veronika Kopp, 1 Robin Stark 2 & Martin R Fischer 1
OBJECTIVES A case-based, worked example approach
was realised in a computer-based learning environ-
ment with the intention of facilitating medical
students/C213diagnostic knowledge. In order to enhance
the effectiveness of the approach, two additional
measures were implemented: erroneous examples
and elaborated feedback. In the context of an
experimental study, the two measures were varied
experimentally.
METHODS A total of 153 medical students were ran-
domly assigned to four experimental conditions of a
2 · 2-factor design (errors versus no errors, elabo-
rated feedback versus knowledge of correct result
[KCR]). In order to verify the sustainability of the
effects, a subgroup of subjects ( n = 52) was compared
with a control group of students who did not
participate in the experiment ( n = 145) on a regular
multiple-choice question (MCQ) test.
RESULTS Results show that the acquisition of diag-
nostic knowledge is mainly supported by providing
erroneous examples in combination with elaborated
feedback. These effects were independent from
differences in time-on-task and prior knowledge.
Furthermore, the effects of the learning environment
proved sustainable.
CONCLUSIONS Our results demonstrate that the
case-based, worked example approach is effective
and efﬁcient.
KEYWORDS randomised controlled trial [publication type];
computer-assisted instruction ⁄ *standards; clinical competence ⁄
*standards; *feedback; teaching ⁄ *methods; *diagnosis;
education, medical, undergraduate ⁄ *methods.
Medical Education 2008: 42: 823–829
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2923.2008.03122.x
INTRODUCTION
Diagnosing is a fundamental competence for every
doctor. However, students and attending doctors
have difﬁculties ascertaining the right diagnosis.
Gra¨sel and Mandl,
1 for example, showed that medical
students at the end of their clinical studies proceed
in an additive and mechanistic way; they tend to
collect large amounts of data without building
concrete hypotheses. We postulate that the diagnostic
knowledge base of the students encompassing
declarative knowledge components (conceptual
knowledge: /C212what information /C213) and action-related
knowledge components like strategic knowledge
(/C212how information /C213
2) and teleological knowledge
(/C212why information /C2132) is deﬁcient. Furthermore,
these components are not sufﬁciently integrated
into more abstract structures (schemata) which would
allow effective and efﬁcient diagnostic reasoning.
In order to overcome this problem and to foster
diagnostic knowledge which allows competent diag-
nostic reasoning, a complex computer-based learning
environment was developed based on the CASUS
TM
online learning tool, which has proved effective in
various studies.
3,4
Following Mandin, 5 diagnostic reasoning can be
understood as schema-based problem-solving.
Therefore, effective learning environments that
systematically support students in constructing and
organising schemata must be provided. We postulate
that learning environments taking advantage of the
transitioning into and during residency
1Department of Internal Medicine, Medical Education Unit,
University of Munich Hospital, Munich, Germany
2Institute of Education, Saarland University, Saarbru¨ cken, Germany
Correspondence: Veronika Kopp, Klinikum der Universita¨tM u¨ nchen,
Medizinische Klinik Innenstadt, Schwerpunkt Medizindidaktik,
Ziemssenstrasse 1, 80336 Munich, Germany.
Tel: 00 49 89 5160 2374; Fax: 00 49 89 5160 4931;
E-mail: veronika.kopp@med.uni-muenchen.de
ª Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2008. MEDICAL EDUCATION 2008; 42: 823–829 823
worked example effect 6,7 are especially appropriate to
achieve this instructional goal. Learning with worked
examples is superior to directly teaching abstract
principles, as well as to actively solving training
problems – at least with regard to initial skill
acquisition.
6 This worked example effect is attributed
to the fact that studying worked examples imposes
lower levels of cognitive load on the learner than
solving training problems, particularly because no
extensive search processes with regard to the correct
solution steps are involved.
6 Therefore, more cogni-
tive resources can be invested in processes of schema
construction. Moreover, studying worked examples
(by contrast with attempting to solve training prob-
lems) focuses the learner /C213s attention on information
that is relevant to schema construction. In various
domains /C212schema-based problem solving is consid-
ered to be very efﬁcient and therefore often seen as a
marking feature of experts /C213problem solving /C213.
6
However, studies on the self-explanation effect8–11
clearly show that studying worked examples does not
automatically result in effective problem-solving
schemas. In order to achieve this goal, cognitive and
meta-cognitive self-explanation processes have to be
fostered systematically by implementing additional
instructional measures.
11–13 In addition, the worked
example method has to be adapted to the instruc-
tional context, instructional goals and domain in
which it is implemented.
So far, worked examples have been investigated
primarily in studies on initial learning in rather
simple and well-structured domains. Thus, we com-
bined the example method with elements of case-
based learning which proved effective in various
problem-based learning scenarios in medicine.
14,15 In
addition, two instructional measures aimed at foster-
ing diagnostic knowledge by stimulating processes of
schema induction were integrated into the learning
environment: erroneous worked examples and
feedback.
A major objective of our study was to assess the
effectiveness of erroneous examples and feedback in
the context of our case-based, worked example
approach. Furthermore, the sustainability of the
learning environment in general was investigated.
Learning from errors
Confronting learners with errors introduces difﬁcul-
ties for the learner – difﬁculties which are desirable
because they can foster the quality of learning
processes and, as a result, learning outcomes.
16 The
method represents a particularly promising measure in
the ﬁeld of medicine, where errors in the process of
diagnosing can have fatal consequences.
17 Following
the classiﬁcation of diagnostic errors by Graber et al.,18
we focused on relevant and severe cognitive errors
caused by /C212inadequate knowledge or faulty data gath-
ering, inaccurate clinical reasoning, or faulty veriﬁca-
tion/C213.
18 Oser and Spychiger 19 assume that every error
can be learned from when and if learners use the error
purposefully as such an opportunity. Therefore,
learners must identify the error and understand the
correct solution by systematically comparing the
incorrect solution with the correct one. A study by
Grosse and Renkl
20 on learning from worked examples
can be interpreted in terms of the necessity of
implementing effective feedback methods when
confronting learners with erroneous examples.
Feedback
According to van Gog et al.,
2 understanding a proce-
dure must involve knowledge of its domain and of its
teleology. Knowledge of a domain consists of princi-
pled knowledge about objects and events in that
domain. Knowledge of the teleology of a procedure is
knowledge of the rationale behind or purpose of the
steps in a procedure.
2 Therefore, effective feedback
should not only contain conceptual knowledge, but
also information which informs the learner of the
rationale behind the selection and application of
operators (designated /C212why information /C213) and
Overview
What is already known on this subject
The effectiveness of worked examples is verified
for initial skills acquisition in well-structured
domains. This also holds true for the effective-
ness of elaborated feedback.
What this study adds
A case-based, worked example approach
implemented in a complex domain proved
effective and efficient; elaborated feedback in
combination with errors is an effective learning
method in the context of worked examples.
Suggestions for further research
These findings must be replicated. Think-aloud
protocols used to investigate students /C213learning
processes should be considered.
824 ª Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2008. MEDICAL EDUCATION 2008; 42: 823–829
V Kopp et al
information about strategic knowledge used by
experts in selecting the operators (designated
/C212how information /C213).
Especially when learners are confronted with com-
plex tasks, elaborated feedback which combines these
kinds of information (in comparison with less infor-
mative feedback such as knowledge of correct result
[KCR] feedback) has positive effects on feedback
reception
21 and knowledge acquisition. 22–25 How-
ever, when only conceptual knowledge has to be
acquired, KCR feedback can be sufﬁcient.
26
Time-on-task
The implementation of erroneous examples and
feedback in the present study aimed to enhance the
effectiveness of the learning environment by fostering
the quality of learning processes. However, coping with
erroneous examples and processing elaborated feed-
back information (or compensating superﬁcial feed-
back by self-explanation behaviour) and the resulting
processes can prolong the time-on-task, thereby
confounding the quality and quantity of learning
processes. From a practical perspective, such effects
are acceptable when the prolonging is moderate and
at the same time associated with substantial learning
effects. However, from a theoretical perspective, these
effects are only acceptable when they do not under-
mine the internal validity of the study. Despite these
potential problems, time-on-task was not restricted
because of considerations about ecological validity:
following an integrative research approach,
27 we planned
to investigate the effects of the two instructional
measures under conditions which are not too far from
realistic learning scenarios in practice.
Research questions
1 To what extent is time-on-task increased by
erroneous examples and feedback?
We expected both measures to increase time-on-task.
However, we postulated that the potential effects on
diagnostic knowledge cannot be explained by
differences in time-on-task.
2 To what extent is diagnostic knowledge facilitated
by erroneous examples and feedback?
We assumed that both erroneous examples and
elaborated feedback have positive effects on the
acquisition of diagnostic knowledge and that the
combination of both measures is especially effective.
3 To what extent are effects of the learning environ-
ment sustainable?
We supposed that effects of the learning environment
on conceptual knowledge would still be veriﬁable
6 weeks after the learning session.
METHODS
Sample and design
A total of 153 medical students (104 women, 49 men)
from two Munich medical faculties, Germany, took
part in the study. All participants were engaged in
clinical studies and were in the second to the sixth
clinical semesters. The average age was around
25 years (mean = 25.02 years, standard deviation
[SD] = 3.62). Students were voluntarily recruited and
received €40 for participation. The subjects were
randomly assigned to the four conditions of a
2 · 2-factor design (Table 1).
Sustainability was assessed with students in their
second clinical semester. Arterial hypertension is part
of the curriculum during this semester and is also
part of a regular multiple-choice question (MCQ)
test. From this population, we drew a sample of
students who had participated in our study ( n = 52;
experimental group) and compared their results on
the MCQ test with those of the rest of the students
from the second clinical semester ( n = 145; control
group). Experimental and control group subjects did
not differ in terms of relevant learning prerequisites.
Furthermore, experimental group students did not
differ from the rest of the students, who participated
in the main study but not in the sustainability study,
with respect to relevant learning prerequisites and
diagnostic knowledge.
Learning environment
The learning environment, integrated in the
CASUS learning tool, consisted of a schema
Table 1 2 · 2-factor design
Design
Factor 2: feedback
Elaborated KCR
Factor 1: errors With errors n =3 6 n =4 1
Without errors n =4 0 n =3 6
KCR = knowledge of correct result
ª Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2008. MEDICAL EDUCATION 2008; 42: 823–829 825
Learning with worked examples in medicine
illustrating the steps of the diagnostic process and
six worked examples dealing with pheochromocy-
toma, renal artery stenosis and primary hyperald-
osteronism. Working through these examples,
learners see themselves in the role of a student on
an elective working together with a general practi-
tioner (GP) who gives feedback. All examples begin
with a clinical situation. The (ﬁctitious) student
starts drawing his conclusions for the working
diagnosis and for the further workup. Subsequently,
the GP gives feedback on his diagnostic steps. The
sequence of giving information, drawing conclu-
sions and obtaining feedback then continues until
the ﬁnal diagnosis is reached. Every example
consists of three or four such sequences containing
three or four screenshots.
The additional schema allows the steps of the
diagnostic process to be contextualised by providing
structured information on all secondary hypertension
diseases. Additionally, the schema explains the
relationship between the different illnesses and the
underlying pathophysiological processes. Further-
more, it indicates which further information is
needed for excluding and including diagnoses,
respectively.
Instructional measures
Errors
In the condition without errors, the student comes to
the right considerations on the basis of the given
information, draws the right conclusions and ﬁnishes
the case with the right diagnosis. In the condition
with errors, the student makes several severe errors.
The choice of errors was guided by the error
taxonomy described by Graber et al.,
18 as well as by an
analysis of relevant cognitive errors in this domain.
After each erroneous decision, the error is corrected
in the GP /C213s feedback.
Feedback
In the elaborated version of the feedback, the
(ﬁctitious) doctor gives additional explanations to
the (right or wrong) considerations and further
consequences drawn by the student. Furthermore,
he elucidates the diagnostic process referring to
underlying pathophysiological knowledge. The con-
ditions with the KCR feedback were very frugal in
comparison with the elaborated version. Consider-
ations, conclusions and further procedures are eval-
uated only as right or wrong; no further explanation
is forthcoming. In the condition /C212errors and KCR
feedback/C213the learners had to deduce the right step in
the diagnostic process from the subsequent solution
step in the example.
Instruments
Prior knowledge
The prior knowledge test measuring domain-speciﬁc
conceptual knowledge contained 21 MCQs, most of
which had been used in the German National Boards
medical examination. Two items were excluded from
analysis because of low item )total correlation. Thus
19 points could be achieved in this measure. The
reliability of the test was sufﬁcient (Cronbach /C213s
a = 0.63).
Diagnostic knowledge
The construct of diagnostic knowledge followed
considerations about relevant knowledge for
understanding domain-speciﬁc procedures. There-
fore, it comprised conceptual, strategic and teleo-
logical knowledge. The 19 conceptual knowledge
tasks of the prior knowledge test were presented
again after the learning phase (Cronbach /C213s
a = 0.60). In order to measure strategic knowledge,
10 key feature problems were applied.
28,29 A max-
imum of 29 points could be achieved. The reli-
ability score was 0.72 (Cronbach /C213s a). Additionally,
three problem-solving items, which functioned as
measures for strategic and teleological knowledge,
were used. In each item, the students had to answer
three questions. They had to generate their leading
diagnosis from the information given in a clinical
case scenario. Furthermore, they were asked to
explain their decision and to describe the under-
lying pathophysiological processes (maximum:
20 points; Cronbach /C213s a = 0.73).
The three tests operationalising diagnostic
knowledge correlated with Pearson coefﬁcients
of 0.45 )0.63. The reliability of the aggregated
diagnostic knowledge measure (maximum:
68 points) was 0.85 (Cronbach /C213s a).
Sustainability of the learning environment was
assessed by a regular MCQ examination which
consisted of 30 questions measuring primarily
conceptual knowledge in the domain of internal
medicine (maximum: 30 points; Cronbach /C213s
a = 0.68). Seven of these questions dealt with the
content matter of the learning environment
(arterial hypertension); the rest of the items
referred to other aspects of internal medicine.
826 ª Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2008. MEDICAL EDUCATION 2008; 42: 823–829
V Kopp et al
Time-on-task
Time-on-task was recorded automatically by the
computer-based learning environment.
Procedure
After a short introduction, students completed the
MCQ test measuring prior knowledge, which was
followed by the learning session, in which the
students worked through the worked examples. After
a 15-min pause, the students worked on the diag-
nostic knowledge tests. Six weeks after the experi-
ment, the regular MCQ examination took place.
Statistical analyses
Effects of the two instructional measures on time-on-
task and sustainability effects were analysed by
variance analyses. In order to determine effects on
diagnostic knowledge, a general linear model (GLM)
was speciﬁed for each knowledge aspect. In the GLM,
the instructional measures were integrated as inde-
pendent variables and prior knowledge and time-
on-task as control variables. Partial g
2 was used as a
measure for effect strength. For bivariate
correlations, Pearson product )moment correlation
coefﬁcients were applied.
RESULTS
Inﬂuence of time-on-task
Students learning with elaborated feedback worked
signiﬁcantly longer with the learning environment
than students in the two KCR conditions (Table 2).
The main effect /C212feedback/C213was signiﬁcant and
substantial ( F[1,149] = 36.15; P < 0.01; partial
g
2 = 0.20). Errors had only a small effect on time-
on-task, which did not reach statistical signiﬁcance
(F[1,149] < 1). The interaction also missed statistical
signiﬁcance ( F[1,149] < 1). Time-on-task was not
associated with diagnostic knowledge. The respective
correlations varied between 0.01 and 0.09.
Effects on diagnostic knowledge
Concerning prior knowledge, no signiﬁcant group
differences were found. However, descriptive differ-
ences in prior knowledge and time-on-task were
statistically controlled in the subsequent analyses.
There were neither ceiling nor ﬂoor effects. Students
in the condition /C212with errors and elaborated feedback /C213
achieved the highest scores in diagnostic knowledge,
followed by the /C212without errors and KCR/C213group and the
/C212without errors and elaborated feedback /C213group.
Students working with erroneous examples and
receiving only KCR feedback did rather poorly.
The main effect/C212errors/C213was signiﬁcant (F[1,144] = 4.30;
P < 0.05; partial g
2 = 0.03). On average, more diag-
nostic knowledge was acquired when erroneous
examples were provided. The interaction effect was
also signiﬁcant (F[1,144] = 9.34; P < 0.01; partial
g
2 = 0.06). As expected, students proﬁted from erro-
neous examples, especially when they received elabo-
rated feedback. Against our expectations, the main
effect /C212feedback/C213missed the level of statistical signiﬁ-
cance (F[1,144] = 1.76; not signiﬁcant [NS]).
Sustainability
On the MCQs not dealing with arterial hypertension,
experimental group students achieved 15.7 of 23
points (SD = 3.12) and control group students
achieved 14.8 points (SD = 3.11). This difference was
not signiﬁcant ( F[1,195] = 2.99; NS). However, on
the arterial hypertension questions, experimental
group students achieved 5.59 of 7 points (SD = 0.95),
whereas control group students achieved only 5.07
Table 2 Time-on-task and diagnostic knowledge in the different learning conditions
With errors Without errors
EF mean (SD) KCR mean (SD) EF mean (SD) KCR mean (SD)
Time-on-task, mins 44.60 (14.70) 31.37 (7.75) 45.49 (16.87) 33.70 (10.02)
Diagnostic knowledge (maximum: 68 points) 47.30 (7.64) 40.57 (6.75) 42.56 (9.44) 43.49 (8.58)
SD = standard deviation; EF = elaborated feedback; KCR = knowledge of correct result
ª Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2008. MEDICAL EDUCATION 2008; 42: 823–829 827
Learning with worked examples in medicine
points (SD = 1.14). This effect was signiﬁcant
(F[1,195] = 8.49; P < 0.01) and of medium size
(partial g2 = 0.04).
DISCUSSION
The primary objective of this study was to facilitate
students/C213diagnostic knowledge in a sustainable
manner. Therefore, a case-based, worked example
approach was realised in a computer-based learning
environment. In order to assure internal validity,
differences in time-on-task and prior knowledge were
statistically controlled for. Furthermore, the students
were randomly assigned to the four experimental
conditions.
The results show that the acquisition of diagnostic
knowledge is mainly fostered by providing erroneous
examples in combination with elaborated feedback.
When only KCR feedback is given, erroneous exam-
ples are detrimental. Against the background of the
rather short time-on-task invested by learners in all
conditions, the effects of the two instructional mea-
sures are remarkable. They conﬁrm pedagogical
considerations about the learning potential of
errors.
19 The unfavourable effect of erroneous
examples in combination with KCR feedback on
knowledge acquisition replicates ﬁndings of studies
in which erroneous examples were provided without
informative feedback measures.
20 In addition, these
ﬁndings are in line with current feedback research in
which the effectiveness of informative feedback
measures is stressed, at least in complex learning.
23
For most students, the information that a speciﬁc
diagnostic conclusion or procedure is not adequate
seems not to be sufﬁcient to induce deep conceptual
understanding. The information deﬁcit in the con-
ditions with KCR feedback, especially when learners
are confronted with erroneous examples, must be
compensated for by effective self-explanation.
7,8,11
However, as Renkl 10 showed, a lot of learners process
example information rather superﬁcially. As a result,
the full potential of the learning method is not
tapped. In fact, at least in the context of complex
learning environments, the feedback given must
inform students why the respective step in the
diagnostic process is wrong and which speciﬁc
conclusion or procedure is adequate. It is clear that
effective processing of this additional information is
not without cost: in our study, elaborated feedback
resulted in a substantial increase in learning time.
However, from a pedagogical perspective, this
additional investment in time-on-task pays off, at
least when erroneous examples are provided.
Six weeks after the experiment had concluded,
medium effects of the learning environment on
conceptual knowledge were still signiﬁcant. The fact
that this effect only occurred when the learners had
to answer MCQs focusing on content aspects repre-
sented in the learning environment validates the
sustainability effect. From a pedagogical perspective,
this ﬁnding is astonishing because the learning
sessions were short and the learning environment was
targeted at fostering not conceptual knowledge, but
diagnostic knowledge, which includes strategic and
teleological knowledge components.
OUTLOOK
If the positive ﬁndings of our study can be replicated,
this learning environment should be integrated into
the regular clinical curriculum at medical schools.
Concerning further studies, sustainability analyses
should include all aspects of diagnostic knowledge. In
addition, in order to gain more penetrating insights
into the sustainability of the instructional measures,
further analyses should include larger experimental
groups which enable differentiated comparisons. Fur-
thermore, thinking-aloud procedures
30 should be
employed in order to investigate effects of erroneous
examples and feedback on the quality of the learning
process. Only by recording the learners /C213self-explana-
tions can more direct indicators for pedagogically
desired processes of schema induction be won.
Contributors:
VK contributed to the conception and design
of the study, the acquisition and analysis of data, the
literature search and the write-up of the paper. RS
contributed to the conception and design of the study,
analysis and interpretation of data, and the write-up of
the paper. MRF contributed to the conception and design
of the study, the acquisition of data and the critical revision
of the paper. All authors approved the ﬁnal manuscript.
Acknowledgements: none.
Funding: this project was funded by the DFG (Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft).
Conﬂicts of interest: none.
Ethical approval: this study was approved by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft.
REFERENCES
1 Gra ¨sel C, Mandl H. Fo¨rderung des Erwerbs diagnosti-
scher Strategien in fallbasierten Lernumgebungen.
[Fostering the acquisition of diagnostic strategies in
case-based learning environments.] Unterrichtswissen-
schaft 1993;21:355–70.
828 ª Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2008. MEDICAL EDUCATION 2008; 42: 823–829
V Kopp et al
2 van Gog T, Paas F, van Merrie ¨nboer JJG. Process-
oriented worked examples: improving transfer
performance through enhanced understanding.
Instr Sci 2004;32:83–98.
3 Fischer MR. CASUS – an authoring and learning tool
supporting diagnostic reasoning. Zeitschr Hochschuldi-
daktik 2000;1:87–98.
4 Simonsohn A, Fischer MR. Evaluation eines fallbasier-
ten computergestu¨ tzten Lernsystems (CASUS) im kli-
nischen Studienabschnitt. [Evaluation of a case-based,
computer-based learning system (CASUS) during the
course of clinical studies.] Dtsch Med Wochenschr
2004;129:552–6.
5 Mandin HC. Schemes for problem solving – hyperten-
sion. In: Meducator. Handbook for Practitioners – Medical
Education Series 1 . 2001 [serial online] Available from:
http://www.meducational.com/journal/indexapr.
html [accessed 5 December 2007].
6 Gerjets P, Scheiter K, Catrambone R. Designing
instructional examples to reduce intrinsic cognitive
load: molar versus modular presentation of
procedures. Instr Sci 2004;32:33–58.
7 Renkl A. The worked-out-example principle in multi-
media learning. In: Mayer R, ed. Cambridge Handbook of
Multimedia Learning. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press 2005;229–46.
8 Chi MTH, Bassok M, Lewis MW, Reimann P, Glaser R.
Self-explanations: how students study and use examples
in learning to solve problems. Cognit Sci 1989;13:145–82.
9 Chi MTH, DeLeeuw N, Chiu MH, LaVancher C. Elic-
iting self-explanations improves understanding. Cognit
Sci 1994;18:439–77.
10 Renkl A. Learning from worked-out examples: a study
on individual differences. Cognit Sci 1997;21:1–29.
11 Stark R (ed.). Lernen mit Lo¨sungsbeispielen. Einfluss un-
vollsta¨ndiger Lo¨sungsbeispiele auf Beispielelaboration, Lern-
erfolg und Motivation . [Learning by Worked Examples.
Effects of Incomplete Examples on Example-
elaboration, Learning Outcomes and Motivation.]
Go¨ttingen: Hogrefe; 1999.
12 Atkinson RK, Renkl A, Merrill MM. Transitioning from
studying examples to solving problems: combining
fading with prompting fosters learning. J Educ Psychol
2003;95:774–83.
13 Grosse CS, Renkl A. Effects of multiple solution
methods in mathematics learning. Learning and
Instruction 2006;16:122–38.
14 Hmelo-Silver CE, Duncan RG, Chinn CA. Scaffolding
and achievement in problem-based and inquiry learn-
ing: a response to Kirschner, Sweller and Clark (2006).
Educ Psychol 2007;42 (2):99–107.
15 Schmidt HG, Loyens SMM, van Gog T, Paas F. Prob-
lem-based learning is compatible with human cognitive
architecture: commentary on Kirschner, Sweller and
Clark (2006). Educ Psychol 2007;42 (2):91–7.
16 Bjork RA. Assessing our own competence: heuristics
and illusions. In: Gopher D, Koriat A, eds. Attention and
Performance XVII. Cognitive Regulation of Performance:
Interaction of Theory and Application . Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press 1999;435–59.
17 Al-Assaf AF, Bumpus LJ, Carter D, Dixon SB. Prevent-
ing errors in healthcare: a call for action. Hosp Top
2003;81:5–12.
18 Graber M, Gordon R, Franklin N. Reducing diagnostic
errors in medicine: what /C213s the goal? Acad Med
2002;77:981–92.
19 Oser F, Spychiger M (eds). Lernen ist schmerzhaft: zur
Theorie des Negativen Wissens und zur Praxis der Fehlerkul-
tur. [Learning is painful. On the theory of negative
knowledge and the practice of error management.]
Weinheim: Beltz 2005.
20 Grosse CS, Renkl A. Learning from worked examples:
what happens if errors are included? In: Gerjets P, Elen
J, Joiner R, Kirschner P, eds. Instructional Design for
Effective and Enjoyable Computer-supported Learning .
Tu¨bingen: Knowledge Media Research Center
2004;356–64.
21 Jacoby J, Troutman T, Mazursky D, Kuss A. When
feedback is ignored: disutility of outcome feedback.
J Appl Psychol 1984;69 (3):531–45.
22 Collins M, Carnine D, Gersten R. Elaborated corrective
feedback and the acquisition of reasoning skills: a study
of computer-assisted instruction. Except Child
1987;54:254–62.
23 Krause U-M (ed.). Feedback und kooperatives Lernen .
[Feedback and cooperative learning.] Mu¨ nster: Wax-
mann 2007.
24 Narciss S (ed.). Informative Feedback as a Bridge from
Instruction to Learning in Computer-Based Trainings.
Proceedings of the 9th European Conference for Research on
Learning and Instruction . (EARW), 2001 Aug, Fribourg,
Switzerland.
25 Pridemore DR, Klein JD. Control of feedback in
computer-assisted instruction. ETR&D 1991;39:27–32.
26 Kulhavy RW, White MT, Topp DW, Chan AL, Adams J.
Feedback complexity and corrective efficiency. Contemp
Educ Psychol 1985;10:285–91.
27 Stark R, Mandl H. Bridging the gap between basic and
applied research by an integrative research approach.
Educational Research and Evaluation , Special issue
2007;13 (3):249–61.
28 Bordage G, Brailovsky C, Carretier H, Page G. Content
validation of key features on a national examination of
clinical decision-making skills. Acad Med 1995;70
(4):276–81.
29 Fischer MR, Kopp V, Holzer M, Ruderich F, Ju ¨ nger J.
A modified electronic key feature examination for
undergraduate medical students: validation threats and
opportunities. Med Teach 2005;27
:450–5.
30 Ericsson KA, Simon HA (eds). Protocol Analysis. Verbal
Reports as Data. Revised edn. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
1993.
Received 5 December 2007; editorial comments to authors
15 February 2008; accepted for publication 27 March 2008
ª Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2008. MEDICAL EDUCATION 2008; 42: 823–829 829
Learning with worked examples in medicine