TITLE: What and how advanced medical students learn
AUTHORS: H. P. A. Boshuizen, M. W. J. van de Wiel, H. G. Schmidt
YEAR: 2012
DOI: 10.1007/s11251-012-9211-z

CONTENT:
What and how advanced medical students learn
from reasoning through multiple cases
H. P. A. Boshuizen • M. W. J. van de Wiel • H. G. Schmidt
Received: 14 February 2012 / Accepted: 15 March 2012 / Published online: 21 April 2012
/C211 Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2012
Abstract The study reported in this article concerns the questions what and how fourth-
year medical students can learn from a series of cases that have a similar underlying
problem. This question is crucial in the theoretical sense as it looks at mechanisms of
updating and improving knowledge structures, which are conjectured to consist of ‘illness
scripts’, which integrate knowledge about enabling conditions for a disease, the underlying
fault, and the consequences or signs and symptoms of the disease. It was found that much
learning was implicit, whilst students explicitly paid attention to variations in enabling
conditions and consequences, which led to improvement of these knowledge components.
Integration of biomedical knowledge into the fault component was, however, hampered by
lack of knowledge and by misconceptions that students were unable to debug in the
absence of learning resources or detailed feedback. The practical importance of this study
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article (doi: 10.1007/s11251-012-9211-z)
contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
To be included in Instructional Science, special issue: Collaborating with digital tools and peers in medical
education. Cases and simulations as interventions in learning. Editors: L. Helle and R. Sa ¨ljo¨
H. P. A. Boshuizen ( &)
CELSTEC, Open University in The Netherlands, P. O. box 2910, 6401 DL, Heerlen, The Netherlands
e-mail: els.boshuizen@ou.nl
H. P. A. Boshuizen /C1M. W. J. van de Wiel /C1H. G. Schmidt
Faculty of Health, Medicine and Life Sciences, Maastricht University, P. O. box 616, 6200 MD,
Maastricht, The Netherlands
e-mail: m.vandewiel@maastrichtuniversity.nl
H. G. Schmidt
e-mail: schmidt@fsw.eur.nl
M. W. J. van de Wiel
Faculty of Psychology, Maastricht University, P. O. box 616, 6200 MD, Maastricht, The Netherlands
H. G. Schmidt
Faculty of Social Sciences, Erasmus University, P. O. box 1738, 3000 DR, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
123
Instr Sci (2012) 40:755–768
DOI 10.1007/s11251-012-9211-z
stems from its close parallels to the learning situation in clinical practice, where patients
(or cases) are the most important learning resources, whilst feedback on results is often
minimal. Implications and possible solutions for clinical teaching are discussed.
Keywords Learning from cases /C1Knowledge restructuring /C1Knowledge integration /C1
Illness scripts /C1Misconceptions
Learning medicine
One of the things you learn at a very young age is that certain conditions in your envi-
ronment or in your own behaviour can lead to pain and other discomfort. This knowledge is
learned from lessons of the format \do/don’t do this—or else—you’ll get ill[. Sometimes
these lessons are reinforced by the experience warned for, which in turn can then be
strengthened by the ﬁnal part of the lesson \I told you![. The following are examples of
such lessons: ‘‘Don’t eat raw meat, or else you’ll get food poisoning’’; ‘‘put on your coat,
or else you’ll catch a cold’’ and ‘‘wash your hands, or else you’ll catch the ﬂu.’’ In answer
to children’s ceaseless questions ‘Why?’ and ‘What is that?’, these lessons can soon
become rather complex. The ﬁrst author remembers that her aunt once forbade her to lick
the bowl clean in which this aunt had prepared cake dough, a treat otherwise, but now it
had been made with duck eggs, two large, greenish eggs with big, very yellow yolks. Her
question ‘Why?’ received the answer that it might give her typhoid fever, a disease—she
was told—that had almost killed her mother when she was a young girl.
Such lessons result in knowledge structures that link enabling conditions (entities,
events, situations that can threaten your health) to consequences (pain, fever, and worse),
and the behaviours needed for prevention or cure (take medicine, get a bandage, bed rest,
chicken soup, etc.). These elements are held together with stories about ‘How’ that can
happen, and that teach children about the faults, which are the underlying mechanisms of
genetic conditions, germs, defence, healing, etc. These knowledge structures can be seen as
the rudimentary forms of more generic scripts that develop with experience, with slots that
have default values and can be instantiated with the speciﬁc value of a certain case,
internally linked by a temporal and causal structure (Schank and Abelson 1977). The
scripts have been called ‘illness scripts’ by Feltovich and Barrows ( 1984). Illness scripts
consist of enabling conditions for a certain disease, the consequences of that disease, and
the biomedical fault that explains how the enabling conditions can lead to consequences.
Physicians’ clinical experience has resulted in very extended, detailed, and differentiated
illness scripts. The scripts are organised in memory based on their similarities and dif-
ferences, and on levels of abstraction and generality. Activated and instantiated illness
scripts generate a diagnosis if the case ﬁndings have acceptable slot values. Otherwise,
related scripts are activated or a temporary mental model is created, in which the fault
mechanism is provisionally adapted based on other knowledge and case ﬁndings (Feltovich
and Barrows 1984; Lesgold et al. 1988).
The study of medicine is very much the study of faults, especially in the ﬁrst years of
traditional curricula when the biomedical topics are taught. Later the clinical courses
follow that describe the appearance, epidemiology, pathophysiology, course, treatment,
and management of diseases. In practice, both kinds of knowledge are needed, which
requires that they be integrated. How important biomedical knowledge is in practice and
when this integration takes place have been much debated in the medical education lit-
erature. Many practitioners stated and still state that the medical curriculum was
756 H. P. A. Boshuizen et al.
123
overloaded with biomedical knowledge and that it was hardly used in practice (see, for
instance, Bordage 1987). Patel et al. (Patel et al. 1989) argued that biomedical knowledge
and clinical knowledge were two worlds apart. Clinical knowledge would be used in
clinical reasoning, whilst biomedical knowledge would be used in case explanation. Still
others (Schmidt and Boshuizen 1993) claimed that with higher levels of expertise bio-
medical knowledge and clinical knowledge would become integrated, and that biomedical
knowledge was used when needed, in diagnosis as well as in explanation. Reorganisation
of biomedical knowledge is needed to integrate it in the fault part of illness scripts.
Knowledge restructuring
Two important ﬁndings provided the grounds for the conclusion that higher levels of
expertise are associated with higher levels of integration (Schmidt and Boshuizen 1993):
First, novices and experts used hardly any biomedical knowledge in diagnosis and case
explanation, whilst intermediates did so to a large extent. However, comparison of the case
explanations by students and experts with a model explanation revealed that the percentage
of concepts that were identical increased sharply with higher expertise levels. Furthermore,
a content analysis of the experts’ explanation revealed that the concepts used were at an
intermediary level of detail, between basic biomedical knowledge and clinical concepts,
with a high explanatory power regarding the case ﬁndings. Examples are ‘sepsis’, ‘micro-
emboli’, and ‘aortic insufﬁciency’. Novices and intermediates on the other hand used very
detailed concepts, for instance explaining the speciﬁc temperature pattern included in the
expert concept ‘sepsis’. Second, students’ performance was largely affected by reducing
the case processing time in the experiment, whilst experienced physicians were hardly
inﬂuenced. Students needed the whole 3 min and 30 s to reason through the case step-by-
step activating their detail-level knowledge, and failed this completely when they were
given only 30 s. Experts were hardly affected.
Based on these ﬁndings and on what is known about the way medical students were
educated, Schmidt and Boshuizen (1993) theorised that initially students build networks of
thousands of concepts. Through repeated use in solving clinical cases, these networks
become validated and connected whilst links are strengthened, and the prominence of
certain concepts and groups of concepts changes. In this process, certain higher-level
concepts, which Schmidt and Boshuizen called ‘encapsulating’ concepts, such as the ones
given above, come to stand for the entire detailed networks of clinical and biomedical
concepts.
This assumption that knowledge restructuring is vital in medical expertise development
is further supported by the ﬁndings of Woods and colleagues (Woods 2007; Woods et al.
2005), who showed that this kind of integrated biomedical knowledge made clinical
knowledge more robust and improved clinical reasoning, whilst Rikers et al. ( 2005)
showed that experts’ biomedical knowledge is always co-activated with clinical knowledge
even in routine situations. Finally, researchers have found that problem-oriented knowl-
edge structures had a positive effect on diagnostic outcomes compared with knowledge
organisation according to generic principles (Coderre et al. 2009; Mclaughlin et al. 2010).
Together these studies suggest that continued and repeated experience with classes of
similar cases may result in the integration of biomedical knowledge in clinical knowledge
as fault knowledge in illness scripts, which in turn has a positive outcome on diagnostic
problem solving. Figure 1 demonstrates how biomedical knowledge and clinical knowl-
edge are linked in an illness script.
Learning from multiple cases 757
123
Implications for instruction and research question
In medical education, the development of such problem-oriented knowledge structures is
an important reason for teaching with clinical cases, as is done in problem-based curricula
(Boshuizen 2009). However, most curricula struggle with time available to cover so many
diseases and basic science topics that no time is spent on the study of sets of similar or
related cases to explore variations in the different elements of the illness scripts. Therefore,
the further development and differentiation of their illness scripts are left to the epide-
miological characteristics of the practices students will participate in later on in their
internships.
We consider the underlying assumption questionable that further illness script devel-
opment will take place automatically once students enter their internships. One reason is
that Prince et al. ( 2000) showed that, at least in the initial stages of learning in practice,
energy and attention go to very different practical aspects of practice. Furthermore, no
empirical data about the spontaneous learning processes when students meet multiple
cases with similar faults exist; hence, we do not have knowledge either about which
learning processes can be left to the students’ own devices and which processes may
beneﬁt from more focussed educational measures. The present study aims to ﬁll in blanks
regarding elements and processes of learning from multiple cases and its outcomes.
Therefore, we asked medical students who are about to enter their internships to reason
through a set of cases with the same underlying problem, gathering information about
their reasoning and knowledge development with think-aloud protocols, case explanations,
and learner reports.
Fig. 1 Example of an illness script of acute bacterial endocarditis for the patient category IV-drug users.
Note: * Concepts that represent enabling conditions (yellow), ** concepts that represent the fault (blue and
pink), other concepts represent the consequences of the fault, i.e., the signs and symptoms of the disease.
Note that some fault concepts have a more biomedical ﬂavour than others; e.g., aorta insufﬁciency or
vegetation on valve. Some are closer to the perceptual and clinical level of the signs and symptoms; e.g.,
fever reaction. (Color ﬁgure online)
758 H. P. A. Boshuizen et al.
123
Method
Participants
Thirty-one 4th-year undergraduate medical students of a medical school with a problem-
based learning (PBL) curriculum participated. Data were collected at the end of the academic
year, which means that the students had almost completed the preclinical part of the cur-
riculum and were about to enter their internships. In medical school, the students had worked
with clinical cases in different settings: paper cases in PBL sessions, simulated patients in the
skills lab, and early experience with real patients in the community and in hospitals. The
participants were randomly assigned to two groups who received different sets of endocri-
nological problems. All students repeatedly studied the basic mechanisms and clinical
consequences of the endocrinological problems in prior training. Due to no shows and
incomplete data sets, one group consisted of 14 students and the other of 17 students.
Materials
We developed two series of ﬁve cases with the same underlying pathophysiological pro-
cess but with different presentations and causes. One series consisted of polycystic ovaries
(PCO) cases and the other series of hyperprolactinaemia (HPA) cases. The core of both
disorders is an endocrine dysfunction in women leading to menstrual and fertility prob-
lems. A study by Dawson-Saunders et al. ( 1990) with expert clinical and biomedical
teachers had earlier indicated that endocrine feedback systems are very important (top 3 of
27) but not difﬁcult (easiest 3 of 27). A practice case and three ﬁller cases concerning other
menstrual problems were developed as well. All cases were based on real patients and
written in cooperation with a gynaecologist and an endocrinologist. The cases were
comparable in length and presented in a standard medical order successively describing
history taking, physical examination, lab ﬁndings, and additional examinations.
Procedure
The students were told that they would be presented with a series of cases and that their task
was to diagnose and explain each case and to learn as much as they could from all these cases.
No suggestions were given as to how the students could approach their learning tasks. Cases
were presented on a computer screen, and were segmented into meaningful sections con-
sisting of a couple of sentences that represented standard units of history taking, physical
examination, lab ﬁndings, and additional examinations. A mouse click brought on the next
unit. Students processed the cases whilst thinking aloud. The instruction was to express
everything that came up in their mind whilst going through a case. Consecutively, the par-
ticipants gave their diagnoses by typing them directly into a window in the presentation
programme and provided a pathophysiological explanation on paper. This format was chosen
to enable the use of graphical representations and reﬂection during explanation. After the
students had completed a case, the ofﬁcial diagnosis was given, as they would have received
similar feedback if they had encountered the patient as clerks in the hospital.
After the instructions, a practice case was used to make the students comfortable with
the procedure. The three ﬁller cases were interspersed as numbers 3, 5, and 7 to ensure
attentive case processing.
Learning from multiple cases 759
123
Finally, after all cases had been processed, the students were reminded of their task to
learn from the cases and to tell what they knew now about PCO or HPA (learner reports).
The students were probed with the concepts that are neutral to illness script categories,
generally used as headers in medical textbooks, and well known to the students: Deﬁnition,
epidemiology, pathophysiology, symptoms, physical examination, further examination,
differential diagnosis, and therapy. Thinking-aloud, explanation, and the learner reports
were audio-recorded and transcribed for further analysis.
Analysis
Progress of knowledge use
The progress of knowledge use over the cases up to the learner reports was charted by
identifying speciﬁc concepts in the protocols. These concepts were based on a list of
relevant encapsulating concepts for the case series, which together explain the fault in the
cases (see Appendix 1). Similar to the examples given above, these concepts differ in depth
and explanatory power. Two concepts in both series are directly linked to observable
consequences; those concepts are termed superﬁcial here. Another two concepts in both
series are also directly linked to consequences but are less observable. They are termed
intermediate here. The rest of the lists consist of concepts describing biomedical processes
and principles that are indirectly linked to enabling conditions and consequences. They are
described as deep (biomedical) concepts. The PCO cases are explained by nine deep
concepts, the HPA cases by ten. These lists were developed in cooperation with four
domain experts. Furthermore, development of misconceptions, reminders of earlier cases,
and language use (professional versus everyday language) were investigated.
Elaborate reasoning about the cases was seen during case processing (14 participants)
and afterward during the pathophysiological explanation (12 participants), whilst 4 of them
did so in both tasks. Therefore, these documents were analysed in combination. Outcomes
were compared with the learner reports.
Learning from the cases
The analysis of the learning process as expressed in the think-aloud protocols, the path-
ophysiological explanations, and the learner reports were developed in an iterative way.
Coding categories and scoring criteria were developed by going through a subset of cases
repeatedly until no changes were needed between cycles. The coding categories regarded
the phase in the learning process where most thinking took place (thinking aloud,
explaining the case, or in the learner report), occurrence of reminders of earlier cases,
biomedical reasoning, improvement over cases, remediation of misconceptions over cases
as well as in the learning reports, and language use. Interrater agreement over another
subset of 10 % revealed an average agreement of 73 %.
Content analysis of the learner reports
The third analysis regarded the results of knowledge development as expressed in the
learner reports. We took a model text description of that disorder, derived from medical
textbooks and checked by two domain experts as a basis for comparison. The model text
was segmented into meaningful wholes and classiﬁed into the same categories of clinical
760 H. P. A. Boshuizen et al.
123
texts that were used as probes. The segments were complex statements consisting of
several propositions. An example is ‘affected are females in the fertile stage of life’. The
numbers of segments per category were identical in the two cases. The following cate-
gories were added, as the learner reports happened to include statements that did not ﬁt the
standard categories: normal physiology (generic knowledge), inferences, and elaborations.
Utterances were mapped on these segments and coded as complete or partial ﬁts. Utter-
ances were classiﬁed as inferences when they could be described as conclusions students
drew within the relevant knowledge domain; they were classiﬁed as elaborations when
they were additions based on other related knowledge ﬁelds. Furthermore, the number of
metacognitive statements referring to knowledge monitoring processes (e.g., ‘I don’t know
if …’) were counted. Inferences, elaborations, and reasoning based on normal physiology
were categorised separately and taken as indicators for active knowledge construction and
reconstruction. Deﬁnition had three segments, epidemiology two, pathophysiology 21,
symptoms 14, physical examination six, further examination ﬁve, differential diagnosis
three, and therapy had seven segments. Scores in the pathophysiology category represent
the use of problem-oriented knowledge, the faults in illness scripts. Epidemiology repre-
sents the illness script category enabling conditions; symptoms and (additional) physical
examination regard consequences. Two independent raters coded the ﬁrst 10 learner
reports. The raters compared and discussed differences until they came to a full agreement.
The remaining learner reports were coded by one rater. Quantitative learner report mea-
sures were analysed with a multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) with repeated
measures.
Results
Progress of knowledge use
Most students used more explicit, detailed reasoning in the ﬁrst case than in later cases in
the series. This pattern was more pronounced in the PCO group. Many students diligently
activated and sometimes painfully reconstructed their knowledge (e.g., participant 436, see
Table A in Online Appendix) when dealing with the ﬁrst case.
Use of speciﬁc fault concepts
The analyses of speciﬁc fault concepts (see Appendix 1) that were used in diagnosing and
explaining the cases and in the learner reports revealed that relatively most of the fault
concepts the students used were superﬁcial, followed by the intermediate concepts, and
then followed by the deep concepts (Table 1). Three values stood out in this pattern: the
relatively high number and proportion of deep concepts in the HPA protocols, the overall
small proportion of intermediate concepts in the HPA learner reports, and the high pro-
portion of intermediate concepts in the PCO protocols. No general trend was discernable in
the emergence or disappearance of deep concepts. In the intermediate concepts we saw,
however, that the concept of ‘endometrial proliferation’, which was most prominent in the
ﬁrst case presented, was followed by ‘anovulation’ in the later cases of the series, indi-
cating that the students extended their case representation over multiple cases. The most
explicit examples are participants 415, 416, and 428 (see Table C in Online Appendix).
Learning from multiple cases 761
123
Learning from the cases
Of the 31 participants, only 15 demonstrated in their dealings with the cases that they
learned from solving the cases. These participants became less uncertain, used more
speciﬁc language, gradually came to focus on the essential aspects of the biomedical
process, or showed more complete pathophysiological explanations (see Tables B and D
in Online Appendix). The following examples illustrate what students learned. One student
evaluated his prior knowledge in light of the cases dealt with: ‘‘It concerns a certain
hormonal disorder, in which I thought to have learned from literature that LH is always
high, oestrogen high and FSH low … but the cases show that it is sometimes different’’
(participant 422). Another concluded in the learner report that she had learned something
new: ‘‘I did not know it were so many [follicles]’’ (p 413). The other 16 students may have
learned but did not show this in their approach to the case, or in their learning reports.
Learning from multiple cases can be assumed to be most effective when students have
well-developed validated knowledge. The think-aloud protocols, explanations, and learner
reports showed that the knowledge of the majority of the participants in this study did not
really meet this criterion (Table 2 and see Tables A and C in Online Appendix). No
participant had all of the relevant knowledge available; 7 had very poor prior knowledge.
The other 24 had basic relevant knowledge that was, however, incomplete and error-prone.
Fourteen engaged in active biomedical reasoning aimed at improving errors or uncer-
tainties the students had recognised. This active debugging in the HPA series was mostly
done within a single case; in the PCO series, active debugging was extended over cases.
Six participants appeared able to—partially—remediate the misconceptions they had
expressed, whereas 2 participants chose to further ignore the errors they noticed. The
remaining 14 participants were either not aware that they made errors of reasoning or were
incapable of solving them, as the participants made errors persistently throughout the case
series. The most common and persistent misconception was that excessive amounts of
oestrogens are converted into androgens in fat cells leading to an androgenic appearance in
affected females, whilst it happens to be the other way round.
Most misconceptions regarded the interactions between the different hormones
(n = 18). Most prominent in the HPA cases were lack of knowledge ( n = 8) and mis-
conceptions about the production or the role of GnRH (a releasing hormone produced in
the hypothalamus) ( n = 3). In the PCO cases, the participants who mentioned peripheral
hormone conversion all showed clear misconceptions about the process ( n = 5). Mostly
Table 1 Total number of relevant encapsulating concepts per case series in diagnosing and explaining the
cases (think aloud and pathofysiological explanation protocols) and in the learner reports for each of the two
case series groups (weighed mean use per concept per group and participant in brackets)
HPA
N = 14
PCO
N = 17
Diagnosis and explanation Learner report Diagnosis and explanation Learner report
Superﬁciala 26 (.93) 15 (.54) 34 (1) 31 (.91)
Intermediatea 11 (.39) 2 (.07) 23 (.68) 11 (.32)
Deepb 46 (.33) 17 (.12) 31 (.20) 17 (.11)
a 2 concepts
b 10 and 9 concepts, respectively
762 H. P. A. Boshuizen et al.
123
such expressions were accompanied by expressions of doubt. Misconceptions were never
rectiﬁed in the learner reports; the misconceptions were merely left out of the report.
Many students ( n = 25) stated in their think-aloud protocols that they had been
reminded of a previous case in the series. Sometimes the students explicitly compared the
ﬁndings. For instance, participant 431 started her learner report with ‘‘From the different
cases I have seen how HPA can manifest itself’’, whilst participant 413 explicitly compared
the size of the ovaries and numbers of cysts in the different cases. Some students distrusted
the similarities due to the artiﬁcial situation. Half of the students ( n = 15) stated in their
learner reports that they had learned from the variation in the cases. Several participants in
the PCO group ( n = 6 out of 8 who referred to the cases) emphasised the variation in
symptoms that had struck them. Half of the participants in the HPA group ( n = 7) also
attended to the variations in pathophysiology. One student explicitly reported on what she
had incorrectly thought before (that ‘‘there was no ovulation because of a lacking pro-
duction of oestrogens’’) but now knew that there can be a ‘‘rather high oestrogen level and
yet no ovulation’’ (participant 412). No students clearly expressed that they had learned
from the reasoning process itself, although one student stated after he had explained the
third case: ‘‘Two more PCO cases and I know the clinical picture of PCO again’’ (par-
ticipant 422).
Knowledge used in the learner reports
The outcomes of the content analysis of the learner reports show that the statements about
illness script categories mainly regard the consequences (symptoms and additional physical
examination) and the fault (pathophysiology). The number of enabling conditions state-
ments is low.
Results for the learner reports showed that the students who had worked on the PCO
series were more extensive in their reports by using more utterances than the students who
had worked on the HPA cases [ F(1,29) = 15.12, MSe = 2.17; p = .001, partial g
2 = .34,
OP = .96; means 13.21 for the PCO group and 6.42 for the HPA group].
The signiﬁcant interaction effect [ F(4.853,140.747) = 4.57; MSe = 2.12, p = .001,
partial g2 = .14, OP = .97] was especially due to the categories (see Fig. 2) normal
physiology, inferences and elaborations (PCO [ HPA), indicating that the group who had
worked on the PCO series put more reasoning effort into biomedical reasoning to ﬁll gaps
in their fault knowledge. The fact that the HPA group scored higher on pathophysiology
suggested that this group’s knowledge better ﬁtted the cases presented. The pathophysi-
ology category had the highest overall mean. Furthermore, the students in the PCO group
tended to generate more metacognitive utterances (5.24 vs. 3.64), but this difference
was not signiﬁcant. Of the four categories that were taken as indicators for illness
Table 2 Quality of the students’
knowledge, ways of reasoning
and dealing with errors as indi-
cated by the number of partici-
pants per category
HPAa PCOb
N = 14 N = 17
Poor prior knowledge 3 4
Incomplete and error-prone knowledge 11 13
Active reasoning, aimed at improvement 5 9
Remediation of errors 3 3
Ignores noticed error – 2
Persistent errors 8 5
Learning from multiple cases 763
123
script categories (epidemiology, symptoms, physical examination, and additional physical
examination), only the latter two showed signiﬁcant differences ( p\ .05; PCO [ HPA).
Discussion
This study departed from the observation that research and theory on illness script con-
struction by medical students emphasises the importance of the integration of—separately
taught—biomedical fault knowledge. This process requires restructuring of biomedical
knowledge, which is assumed to take place as a function of the application of such
knowledge on clinical problems. Within the limits of preclinical education, these processes
are supervised, for instance, in tutorial groups in PBL, but in clinical teaching settings,
teachers focus different things, e.g., differential diagnosis and treatment, whilst the stu-
dents’ main task is to take patients’ full history and examination and report that in the
patients’ records. Whilst in preclinical settings, the curriculum and teachers deﬁne which
cases are presented; in the clinical settings, it is the epidemiology of the time of the year
and speciﬁc hospital or outpatient clinic. Furthermore, feedback on the results is often
delayed, if indeed the doctor or student ever receives that feedback. This makes the clinic a
reduced learning setting. In this context, we situated our concern about what medical
students learn spontaneously from reasoning through a series of cases that have a similar
underlying biomedical problem and where only reduced feedback is provided. More
speciﬁcally, we wanted to know how knowledge about the constituent parts of illness
scripts (enabling conditions, fault, and consequences) develop, where we left the possi-
bility open that different parts do not develop in the same way.
The results can be summarised as follows:
(1) Students did learn from processing multiple cases even when the feedback is
restricted to the diagnosis. They built up representations faster, became more secure,
Fig. 2 Elements of learner reports of students who had either worked on the PCO series or on the HPA
series
764 H. P. A. Boshuizen et al.
123
used more speciﬁc language, and tested their knowledge against case information.
Yet half of the students did not show this kind of learning.
(2) Most students learned from the variations in enabling conditions and consequences
components of the cases. Some students compared prior knowledge with case
ﬁndings, some actively compared cases, drawing conclusions about enabling
conditions and consequences, whilst others seemed to learn implicitly. No student
made errors in their conclusions.
(3) Learning from a series of cases appeared to have less positive outcomes regarding the
fault component of illness scripts. Many students had poor knowledge, including
misconceptions. Some tried, and one even succeeded in debugging these miscon-
ceptions, but the results of these enterprises never made it to the learner reports. Since
one of the probes for the learner report invited students to report on what they knew
now about the pathophysiology of the disease, this ﬁnding seems to indicate that the
students’ knowledge did not really improve. Other indicators for this lack of learning
or improving problem-oriented knowledge were (a) relative lack of use of deep
encapsulating concepts especially regarding endocrine regulation and (b) application
of generic biomedical knowledge and the emergence of elaborations and inferences in
the learner reports. These ﬁndings suggest that knowledge construction and
reconstruction were still in progress and were hampered by a lack of knowledge
and by deep misconceptions.
In summary, we may conclude that there is much implicit learning, which may lead to
faster recognition, strengthening of the links between concepts, and tuning of knowledge to
practical conditions (Anderson 1982). As many students did not show any explicit learning
processes, this result raises doubts about the students’ ability to take full advantage of
learning from cases. Furthermore, explicit learning anchored by given case ﬁndings con-
sisted of two types: comparison of case ﬁndings with prior knowledge and explicit com-
parison of cases. Both processes had positive outcomes, but in the current setting, this
learning is very dependent on whether the students’ attention is also drawn to co- and
invariation between cases (Marton and Pang 2006). Finally, explicit case explanations
based on deep concepts resulted in knowledge construction and debugging processes that
are considered to be conducive to knowledge network validation and (re)structuring, but
students were unable to complete these processes unsupported. We may conclude from
these analyses that students may learn patterns of and variations in enabling conditions and
consequences from this kind of learning situation but that unsupported case analyses are in
no way sufﬁcient for integrating biomedical knowledge in illness scripts.
Before answering the question which learning processes can be left to their own devices
and what the implications for teaching are, we must mention that the teaching hospital,
despite the term, is primarily a workplace where patients come ﬁrst, and where medical
students work and learn. Yet in this environment, patients are the ﬁrst learning resources,
apart from the medical and nursing staff and reference materials such as books and
databases (Dornan et al. 2008). In this context, we tend to conclude that students are well
able to learn the patterns and variations of enabling conditions and consequences inde-
pendently. However, learning can become more fruitful if students are supported to build a
case-base they can reﬂect on in a systematic way. Modern technology such as personal
digital assistants become rapidly integrated in student learning in the clinic (Garrett and
Jackson 2006; Ranson et al. 2007; Tempelhof 2009) as a resource or as an access point to
the students’ portfolio where they can upload case information and reﬂections. Buckley
et al. (2009) concluded in their review study that the higher-quality studies found suggested
Learning from multiple cases 765
123
that learning portfolios help medical students improve the integration of theory with
practice, and lead to greater self-awareness and reﬂection. Integration with the hospital
information and communication technologies-systems might be very worthwhile for
learning but is hindered by system safety measures and by patient privacy considerations.
The present results do not tell whether students will use resource information to debug a
misconception in biomedical knowledge, which is a required condition for integration. As
one—both teacher and student—is aware of poor knowledge and misconceptions only
during problem-solving, and since debugging is an effortful enterprise, it is doubtful
whether opportunities for impromptu case-based teaching events in the clinical practice
(e.g., in outpatient clinics, or grand rounds) are sufﬁcient. On top of that, active knowledge
debugging and integration should also take place off-line, outside the situation where the
problem was detected. Kassirer ( 2010) suggested a potentially powerful case conference
method, in which a maximum of 30 students, clerks, or interns participate. Participants
bring in their own cases. This is where the method might integrate with portfolio work. A
coach who is unfamiliar with the cases best supports the group in case analysis. The main
goal of these conferences is optimising clinical reasoning, but an important rule in the
reasoning process is ‘‘Working diagnoses, that is, hypotheses used for prognostic or
therapeutic recommendations, are evoked only after they are assessed for their adequacy in
explaining all positive, negative, and normal clinical ﬁndings, and for their pathophysio-
logic reliability—namely, a check on the reasonableness of causal linkages between
clinical events’’ (Kassirer 2010, p. 1119). The role of the coach is that all participants are
active and to prevent cognitive errors from being made. Though Kassirer himself focused
on clinical reasoning skill, cognitive restructuring should be a by-product of the process.
The focus of this study was theory development, that is, to ﬁnd out what students can
learn spontaneously from multiple cases. The outcomes were to a large extent inﬂuenced
by the speciﬁc case mixes. If medical educators were right that the topics at hand were
important and relatively easy, it is hard to say what will happen with more difﬁcult topics.
The instructional conclusions based on these outcomes regarded the clinical period in
which further learning should take place. Findings at the point of transition from one
learning environment to the next, or from theory to practice, always generate the question
whether education in the previous period should not have provided for this problem. Apart
from a policy issue, this issue also concerns pedagogical content knowledge. Prevention of
misconceptions is not a big issue in medical education literature. Feltovich et al. ( 1997)
warned against simpliﬁcation in such complex domains and instead advised multiple
perspectives and metaphors to make students appreciate the full complexity of the bio-
medical domain.
The strength of the present study is that it investigated unsupported, spontaneous
learning, which allowed us to draw conclusions about the learning processes and outcomes.
Some of these conclusions were based on what was present in the protocols; others were
based on what was not present. Though the latter conclusions play a small role in the
implications formulated, especially conclusions about implicit learning and not learning
should be further investigated with other methods.
Appendix
See Table 3.
766 H. P. A. Boshuizen et al.
123
References
Anderson, J. R. (1982). Acquisition of cognitive skill. Psychological Review, 89 (4), 369–406.
Bordage, G. (1987). The curriculum: Overloaded and too general? Medical Education, 21 , 183–188.
Boshuizen, H. P. A. (2009). Teaching for expertise: Problem-based methods in medicine and other pro-
fessional domains. In K. A. Ericsson (Ed.), The development of professional performance: Approaches
to objective measurement and designed learning environments (pp. 379–404). New York, NY:
Cambridge University Press.
Buckley, S., Coleman, J., Davison, I., Khan, K. S., Zamora, J., Malick, S., et al. (2009). The educational
effects of portfolios on undergraduate student learning: A best evidence medical education (BEME)
systematic review. BEME Guide No. 11. Medical Teacher, 31 (4), 282–298.
Coderre, S., Jenkins, D., & Mclaughlin, K. (2009). Qualitative differences in knowledge structure are
associated with diagnostic performance in medical students. Advances in Health Sciences Education,
14, 677–684.
Dawson-Saunders, B., Feltovich, P. F., Coulson, R. L., & Steward, D. E. (1990). A survey of medical school
teachers to identify basic biomedical concepts medical students should understand. Academic Medi-
cine, 7, 448–454.
Dornan, T. J., Scherpbier, A. J. J. A., & Spencer, J. (2008). Learning medicine: A continuum from theory to
practice. In J. M. Spector, M. D. Merrill, J. van Merrie ¨nboer, & M. P. Driscoll (Eds.), Handbook of
research on educational communications and technologies (3rd ed., pp. 556–566). New York:
Erlbaum.
Feltovich, J. P., & Barrows, H. S. (1984). Issues of generality in medical problem solving. In H. G. Schmidt
& M. L. De Volder (Eds.), Tutorials in problem-based learning (pp. 128–142). Assen: Van Gorcum.
Feltovich, P. J., Spiro, R. J., & Coulson, R. L. (1997). Issues of expert ﬂexibility in contexts characterized by
complexity and change. In P. J. Feltovich, K. M. Ford, & R. R. Hoffman (Eds.), Expertise in context
(pp. 125–146). Menlo Park, CA: AAAI Press/MIT Press.
Garrett, B. M., & Jackson, C. (2006). A mobile clinical e-portfolio for nursing and medical students, using
wireless personal digital assistants (PDAs). Nurse Education Today, 26 , 647–654.
Kassirer, J. P. (2010). Teaching clinical reasoning: Case-based and coached. Academic Medicine, 85 ,
1118–1124.
Table 3 Relevant fault concepts for the HPA and PCO cases
HPA PCO
Superﬁcial concepts Superﬁcial concepts
Galactorrhea Hirsutisme
Irregular cycles with withdrawal bleedings Irregular cycles with withdrawal bleedings
Intermediate concepts Intermediate concepts
Endometrium proliferation Endometrium proliferation
Anovulation Anovulation
Deep concepts Deep concepts
Hypothalamic-pituitary-end organ axes Hypothalamic-pituitary-end organ axes
Compression (damage) Follicles; functional - hormonal secretion and receptors
Hypothyrodism Hyper-oestrogenic environment
Hypogonadism Hyper-androgenic (ovaries)
Dopamine antagonist Vicious circle
Negative feedback of prolactin on GnRH Feedback oestrogens on LH and FSH
Negative feedback of T3 and T4 on TSH Peripheral conversion of andosteendiol into oestrogen
Disconnection Inhibition
Inhibition Stimulation
Stimulation
Learning from multiple cases 767
123
Lesgold, A., Rubinson, H., Feltovich, P., Glaser, R., Klopfer, D., & Wang, Y. (1988). Expertise in a complex
skill: Diagnosing X-ray pictures. In M. T. H. Chi, R. Glaser, & M. Farr (Eds.), The nature of expertise
(pp. 311–342). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Marton, F., & Pang, M. F. (2006). On some necessary conditions of learning. The Journal of the Learning
Sciences, 15(2), 193–220.
Mclaughlin, K., Novac, K., Rikers, R., & Schmidt, H. (2010). Does applying biomedical knowledge improve
diagnostic performance when solving electrolyte problems? Canadian Medical Education Journal,
1(1), e4–e9.
Patel, V. L., Evans, D. A., & Groen, G. J. (1989). Biomedical knowledge and clinical reasoning. In
D. A. Evans & V. L. Patel (Eds.), Cognitive science in medicine: Biomedical modeling (pp. 53–112).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Prince, K. J. A. H., Van de Wiel, M. W. J., Scherpbier, A. J. J. A., Van der Vleuten, C. P. M., & Boshuizen,
H. P. A. (2000). A qualitative analysis of the transition from theory to practice in undergraduate
training in a PBL-medical school. Advances in Health Sciences Education, 5 (2), 105–116.
Ranson, S. L., Boothby, J., Mazmanian, P. E., & Alvanzo, A. (2007). Use of personal digital assistants
(PDAs) in reﬂection on learning and practice. Journal of Continuing Education in the Health Pro-
fessions, 27(4), 227–233.
Rikers, R. M. J. P., Loyens, S., te Winkel, W., Schmidt, H. G., & Sins, P. H. M. (2005). The role of
biomedical knowledge in clinical reasoning: A lexical decision study. Academic Medicine, 80 (10),
945–949.
Schank, R., & Abelson, R. (1977). Scripts, plans, goals and understanding: An inquiry into human
knowledge structure. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Schmidt, H. G., & Boshuizen, H. P. A. (1993). On the origin of intermediate effects in clinical case recall.
Memory and Cognition, 21 , 338–351.
Tempelhof, M. W. (2009). Personal digital assistants: A review of current and potential utilization among
medical residents. Teaching and Learning in Medicine, 21 (2), 100–104.
Woods, N. N. (2007). Science is fundamental: The role of biomedical knowledge in clinical reasoning.
Medical Education, 41 , 1173–1177.
Woods, N. N., Brooks, L. R., & Norman, G. R. (2005). The value of basic science in clinical diagnosis:
Creating coherence among signs and symptoms. Medical Education, 39 , 107–112.
768 H. P. A. Boshuizen et al.
123